Well, the movie with Caro didn't work out, due to technical
difficulties: she'd bought the tickets for the wrong day, so we ended
up starting to see some kind of 3-D animated hero film for kids before
going down to the ticket counter to buy new tickets.  Her intense
frustration at this state of affairs reminded me that she's one of the
most organized and together people in my current inner circle.  Maybe
I can improve my conscientiousness by hanging out with her more.

Dinner with Naudy, however, was awesome; but afterwards I was
sufficiently tired (and stuffed --- Los Sabios food tempts one to
overindulge) that I'm not going to the hospital tonight.

I did my first experiments with frequency-domain convolution and
sparse factorings of time-domain FIR kernels, but I don't know

I've stuffed the last of the moldy clothes in the wash bucket so I'll
wash them tomorrow.  And I've gotten some leads on roommates on the
web, which I'll check out more tomorrow.

So for the morning here's my plan:

* Wake up 10:00.
* Bootup and fsck (1 hour):
    * Put away bed.
    * Flaxseed omelet with salsa golf, or something.
    * Wash dishes and another bottle.
    * Fold and put away dry laundry.
    * Shower and laundry.
    * Sweep floors.  (Sisyphean: I swept them two days ago, and
      they're already dirty again.  This is still an improvement over
      Augean, I suppose.)
* Optimization (1 hour):
    * Bottle soybeans.
    * Put away stray objects from living room floor.
* Reticulate splines:
    * Read dspguide chapter on frequency-domain convolution.
* Networking:
    * Go to Santi's.
    * Call Telefónica to get the internet connection here fixed.
    * Investigate housing possibilities: Craigslist, and followup on leads.
    * Work project:
        * Check status of server; do the needful.
        * Talk with client.
    * Look for a cellphone on Mercadolibre, Craigslist, OLX.
* Multimedia services:
    * 17:50: go to movie with Caro.

***

Yeah, that was the plan.  Here's what I actually did:

* Wake up 10:00.  Reset alarm for 11:00.  At 11:00, reset alarm for
  12:00.  Finally get up 16:00.  Apparently I wasn't giving myself
  adequate sleep if I had built up a six-hour deficit.  Put away bed.
* Eat a hurried breakfast: an alfajor maicena, a fried egg with soy
  sauce, a cup of English Breakfast tea, and a glass of
  pear-vinegar-flavored sugar water.
* Remember Violeta is coming today and would be arriving about the
  time I'd be going to the movie.  We arranged that on Tuesday; I can
  hardly cancel it now on a whim.  Also I need to go pick up my
  blankets from the laundry place (AR$50), but I don't have the money
  in pesos, and I doubt the laundry place will make change for US$100.
  I need to go change some dollars to pesos.
* Spend 50 minutes changing dollars to pesos, then pick up the
  laundry.  Apologize to Caro.
* Buy a bottle of bleach (AR$22 for four liters), since I'm almost
  out, and the cleaning-supplies store is right across the street.

An interesting thing to note was my anxiety level while returning from
money changing to go to the laundry place: I worried they might have
already closed (I hadn't noted their hours), and that I'd have to
spend the night tonight again under only the sheets and bedspread,
inconveniencing Violeta as well as myself.  My guilt at this
possibility was kind of extreme.  My relief upon coming in sight of
the people sitting around inside the laundry's plate-glass windows was
enormous.

This anxiety and guilt is a miniature version of the debilitating
version I experience during procrastination.

As it turns out, Violeta is delayed, and so I could have gone to see
the movie anyway, which I probably would have found out if I had
messaged her to find out her schedule when I got up instead of after
the movie had already started.  So in this case my lack of
communication exacerbated the situation caused by my lack of planning.
Rationally, I know that all of this is much more important to me than
to anyone else, and that the guilt I'm feeling is out of proportion to
the real negative impact it's having on other people, and that that
same guilt is what makes me reluctant to initiate those
communications --- a vicious cycle.

Now it's 18:00, and I have time to make a revised plan for the rest of
the day.

* Cooking:
    * Make noodles with white sauce.
    * Make lentils.
    * Make a salad, using oil, pear vinegar, lettuce, celery, and
      tomato.
    * For the above, buy onions, milk, lettuce, and celery, before
      house maintenance:
* House maintenance (before Violeta arrives, time permitting):
    * Sweep floors.  (Sisyphean: I swept them two days ago, and
      they're already dirty again.  This is still an improvement over
      Augean, I suppose.  But it's a very quick task.)
    * Bottle soybeans.
    * Fold and put away dry laundry.
    * Shower and laundry.
    * Wash dishes and another bottle, if there's still time.
    * Put away stray objects from living room floor.
* Study (alongside Violeta):
    * Read dspguide chapter on frequency-domain convolution.
    * Read remaining dspguide chapters.

(Planning time: 7 minutes.)

***

An hour later, I've bought the foods, plus an off-brand Terma, a new
kind of bottlable noodles, and some fresh tomatoes.  I'm soaking some
sun-dried tomatoes now; maybe I can use them in the salad, or maybe
Violeta would prefer a tuco sauce rather than a roux.

While I was out, I met a little girl jumping rope on the sidewalk,
across the street from the MACABI building, which is surrounded by
heavy brick barricades in case of another truck bomb.  I hung up the
blankets on the patio to air out, since I forgot to specify not to
soak them in nose-anesthetizing perfumes.

I was disappointed to find that the bottle I washed yesterday still
isn't completely dry.  I'd left it to air-dry rather than using
alcohol as usual, which seems to have been ineffective.  I filled it
with about a kilogram and a half of soybeans anyway; hopefully the
moisture will diffuse throughout the soybeans rather than just making
a few moist spots that can harbor mold.

***

Violeta was very pleased with the dinner, with which she helped.  To
the basic roux (butter, flour, and milk) I added salt, pepper, dried
parsley, and freshly-grated nutmeg, with excellent results.

We ended up not studying, instead going out for ice cream (AR$25 for a
quarter-kilo) before dinner.  Dinner ended a bit past midnight, and
then we went to bed.

We took a shower; I soaked the laundry (this load is a bucket full of
clothes that had gotten moldy from a flood) with sodium percarbonate,
but I haven't washed it yet.

Rather than going to the hospital to get an appointment, I decided to
sleep instead.  (To get an appointment, you have to be in line when
they open the doors at 5:00.)  This was probably a good idea, because
I had another night of sleeping over 12 hours.  While my health
probably needs the sleep, I worry that it could promote depression.

I woke up at 6:30 with her this morning and made her pancakes with
dried apricots for breakfast.  As I woke up, I was dreaming that a
family of six weasels had divided up my nasopharynx for living space,
which was my first sign that I had a ferocious sore throat.  I went
back to bed when she left at 7:15, sleeping another 7 hours.  I had to
put on 很愛很愛 by Sammi (an album I bought in Seattle in 2000) and
Queen's Greatest Hits on a couple of occasions to enable me to sleep
through the child abuse next door.  At one point, the man was roaring
"¡Callate!" over and over at the small child, and when the child began
to cry, he began to laugh.  Now he's emitting periodic falsetto
screams.

I spent some time reading Wikipedia about different acid-base
theories and anatomy.

My lunch (I suppose it's not a breakfast since I had pancakes with
Violeta before sunrise) will be breadsticks with the roux, plus some
of the lentils.  Then I'll wash the laundry that's been soaking
overnight, wring it out to dry, go call Telefónica, and head over to
Santiago's house.

***

To the lunch above I added sesame seeds on the lentils, English
Breakfast tea with the rest of the orange syrup, celery, and two fried
eggs.  I guess maybe my body thinks it's time to stop losing weight.
I've left the shower running on the laundry to give it a post-soak
rinse; now it's time for a shower and a real wash for the laundry.

Things on my shopping list: sugar, laundry detergent, Scotch tape,
milk, butter, light bulbs.  I read in Wikipedia that the sale of
incandescent light bulbs was banned in Argentina in 2010; if that's
true, the light bulbs may be a bit of a challenge.

***

One of the molded garments, a light-colored pillowcase, seems to have
suffered spotty staining from the mold.  I'm going to try soaking it
in bleach water overnight to see if that helps.

***

Walking to Santi's house, I stopped by a hardware store which sells
replacement fan parts and fan service (of the hardware-repair type,
not the anime type).  They also sell new desk fans: AR$120.  I bought
three replacement 28W lightbulbs (to replace 40W bulbs) for the
apartment, which cost AR$60 in total.  It turns out that the
traditional incandescent lights are no longer available, but halogen
replacements are.

Since this represents an investment in repairing the furnishings
(increasing the value over the original) of about 3% of the rent, I'm
going to see if I can persuade José to reimburse me.  I guess I should
have asked for a receipt.

I bought a helium Mylar balloon from a clown on the sidewalk for
AR$40.  It has pictures of Mickey and Minnie Mouse, and says in
English, "Best wishes".  On the top, it has a similar message in
Chinese which presumably says the same thing.

