I just spent a few hours designing and printing things in PLA with a
US$400 Prusa Mendel RepRap, using a workflow that goes like this:
OpenSCAD → Slic3r → Pronterface → RepRap → break them.  I think this
is the wrong approach, for a couple of reasons.

Printing problems I've seen
---------------------------

The RepRap does not realize your 3-D model with perfect precision or
reliability.  Here are the ways I've seen it fail:

- Printing on dirty glass, or glass that's not hot enough, the bottom
  layer can peel up from the glass when pulled by tension from the
  extruder.  This may be corrected by subsequent layers, or it may
  generate a runaway positive feedback loop as the extruder crashes
  into the debris, peeling more and more of it.

- Of course anything needs a sufficient area of contact with the
  printing bed to anchor it during printing.

- When the bed is insufficiently well leveled, printing the first
  layer in some places will not deposit any plastic and may cause the
  pinch wheels to lose their grip on the filament.  This could be
  remedied in software by using a thicker bottom layer in models with
  a large X and Y extent.

- Sometimes, particularly with a horizontal overhang, Slic3r tries to
  delineate a layer boundary by depositing filament on top of empty
  space.  This works up to a point, particularly if it starts on top
  of non-empty space and then goes out a very short distance onto
  empty space.

- A tall, skinny model can start to flex with the extruder as the
  extruder drags across the top of it; this results in a sort of
  backlash.  This is relatively innocuous when you're depositing 10%
  infill, but when you're depositing 100% infill, it can result in the
  plastic mounding up, which creates positive feedback — the mound of
  plastic obstructs the extruder further, which results in further
  bending and sometimes even getting unstuck from the bed.

- Any kind of obstruction can result in lost steps in X and Y, since
  the RepRap runs entirely open-loop.

- Depositing a horizontal surface on top of an open space (either one
  in the model or one generated from infill) always sags somewhat; the
  extent of the sag, and whether further layers on top of it are able
  to become fully solid, both vary somewhat.  It's easy to end up with
  just a set of parallel threads that don't cohere into a surface.

- Sometimes narrow vertical walls encounter the same fate: just a set
  of parallel, unconnected threads.  I think that when I saw this, it
  was from an infill setting that was just on the edge of instability
  being driven over the edge by the cooling blower.

- I saw one design that drove the X drive belt into one of the support
  beams when it drove the Z-axis up past 110 mm.  We aborted the print
  before it could break the printer.  Apparently the electronics and
  Pronterface don't enforce a sufficiently safe bounding box in Z.

- Layers that are too discontinuous (that is, that consist of separate
  islands that are too small) suffer from the unavoidable imprecision
  in start and stop times of the extruder.  Sometimes this results in
  prints completely failing, as the extruder wiggles around in the air
  millimeters away from the actual workpiece, perhaps spewing
  spaghetti.

- Very small layers can remain so molten that the achievable overhang
  drops dramatically.

- Warping during cooling can delaminate the piece and peel it up from
  the build platform.

- Vibration of the machine produces small but visible and palpable
  horizontal displacement errors.

- For some reason, polygons bulge at their vertices ("corner
  blobbing"), with the result that their outer edges are concave.
  Perhaps the extruder stops for a moment before changing direction.

- Horizontal or nearly-horizontal surfaces that are supposed to be
  solid sometimes come out porous, due presumably to miscalibration of
  filament diameter, and sometimes to other kinds of failures
  mentioned above on top layers.

- Stringers, of course, which are partly a problem of getting your
  forward and reverse pinch wheel settings right to prevent ooze, and
  also of having a toolpath that isn't too discontinuous; and you can
  wiggle the extruder around to break existing stringers sometimes.
  Skeinforge has a setting to try to build separated vertical "towers"
  each a few layers at a time, rather than potentially creating
  stringers between them on every layer, but unfortunately this needs
  a model of the extruder in order to work properly.

- Too small of a base area can make it too easy for the model to
  unstick from the glass.

Often one problem leads to another: maybe flexing leads to mounding,
which leads to lost steps, which leads to spaghetti spewed into the
void.

All of these problems can be solved with software, and e.g. Skeinforge
has settings you can use to solve them already.  So what am I
suggesting that we do differently?

We can automate solving these problems so you don't have to use trial
and error to get a working print.

Design Rule Checks
------------------

Semiconductor fabrication has had decoupling between the design and
fabrication steps since about 1980, using the methodology designed by
Carver Mead and Lynn Conway.  As I understand it, which might be
wrong, this works as follows.  First you design your masks in software
with some kind of abstraction of the process steps provided by your
fab; then you simulate the circuits to get a good idea of analog
performance; then you send the masks (originally on tape, thus the
term "tape-out") to the fab, who produces some number between 10 and
100 000 of your new design, which you can test a few weeks later.

A crucial aspect of this process is a thing called "design rule
checks", which you run on your masks before simulation, and which the
fab also runs on your masks before doing any photolithography.  DRCs
are mechanically checkable requirements which, if met, that ensure
that your circuit will come out working properly despite the
limitations of the fabrication process, things like "no wires less
than 2Λ wide" and "minimum 2Λ spacing between wires".  If your layout
passes the DRCs specified by the fab, it's dramatically more likely to
produce a working chip.

Shapeways publishes a sort of set of DRCs (they call them "design
guidelines" or "printability checks") for STL files that you'd like
them to print; for example, their [ceramic page][0] says, among other
things:

[0]: http://www.shapeways.com/materials/ceramics

> Max bounding box: 340 × 240 × 170 mm and X + Y + Z ≤ 400 mm  
> Min bounding box: X + Y + Z ≥ 120 mm  
> Min density: 5% material density  
> Max wall thickness: 15.0 mm thick   
> Min embossed detail: 2.0 mm high & wide

There are another ten parameters describing what kinds of models they
can print, at the STL level of abstraction.  They do some of these
DRCs (density, bounding box, wall thickness, model integrity) when you
upload a model, while others are done manually.

But I'm thinking about DRCs a layer of abstraction down from there,
because none of the problems I've seen with RepRap prints are things
that printability checks would have caught, except for the
bounding-box violation I mentioned above.

I want DRCs that are checks you run on your final G-Code that would
detect problems like these:

- Excessively steep overhang (with different thresholds for
  cantilevered overhang and void-spanning overhang);
- Overhang deposited in the wrong order (spaghetti spewed into the
  void);
- Bounding box violations;
- Insufficient time to cool before printing another layer on top;
- Insufficient margin for error in filament diameter (resulting in
  possible mounding or possible unwanted porosity); and
- Ooze-producing patterns of movement (e.g. traveling immediately
  after shutting off the extruder)

Simulation and Optimization for Toolpath Design
-----------------------------------------------

To a great extent, you could use AI search techniques to find a
toolpath that most closely approximates the desired shape (as
expressed in an STL file) without violating DRCs, and then to optimize
the toolpath for metrics like minimal plastic use and maximal speed.
If you take this a little further, you find yourself simulating the
plastic as it comes out of the extruder and cools, rather than using
rules of thumb about allowable overhang, slenderness, and cooling
time, with dozens of parameters that you have to tweak until you get
reliably good prints.

(I'm assuming here that the thermodynamics and mechanics of the
plastic coming out of the extruder can be characterized with a smaller
set of parameters, ideally parameters that can be measured to a few
significant figures rather than attempted via trial and error.)

But really you'd like to optimize things besides plastic use and print
speed, while keeping the shape as a given.  For example, maybe you'd
like to optimize strength or smoothness along with plastic use.  But
what is "strength"?  That depends on the situation.

Why Are Long Bones Curved?
--------------------------

A lot of our long bones, like femurs, tibias, ulnas, and phalanges,
are frequently subject to compressive stress.  Since they're long and
slender, an easy way for them to fail under compressive stress is by
buckling: bending to one side or the other, giving the compressive
stress progressively more leverage against the tensile strength on the
outside of the bend, until the bone breaks.  It's well known how to
maximize resistance to buckling for a given slenderness of strut: make
the strut as close to perfectly straight as possible, so that a
greater force is needed to initiate buckling.

So why are all these long bones curved, since a broken bone is such a
serious injury and so important to prevent?

I suspect that the answer is that early buckling, far from increasing
the danger of broken bones, decreases it.  The long bone's diaphysis
acts as a spring, absorbing up to a certain amount of energy without
damage, and limiting the forces experienced by other parts of the bone
and the body until the energy and displacement are very large.

Now, I thought this was just a crank hypothesis I'd dreamed up, but it
turns out that actual scientists published basically this idea in
1988: [JE Bertram and AA Biewener][1], and they've been cited [149
times][2]; they cited other forms of it published in 1984.

[1]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3419194
  "Bone curvature: sacrificing strength for load predictability?"
[2]: http://scholar.google.com.ar/scholar?cites=8081012706570065627&as_sdt=2005&sciodt=0,5&hl=fr

So long-bone curvature is actually an advanced design technique for
making bones and bodies less brittle.  It was evolved by exploring the
possibilities thoroughly with genetic algorithms, and has produced
remarkably resilient and strong skeletons for our bodies by the
judicious use of an unremarkable mineral.

Simulation and Optimization for Shape Design
--------------------------------------------

I printed a connector to connect two plastic coke bottles together,
with a vertical axis.  It had a coke-bottle thread (PCO-1810) on each
side, and a lip in the middle.  The print took 45 minutes; as soon as
I got two bottles into it, it delaminated, each bottle keeping its
section of the thread.

I rotated it to horizontal, took the opportunity to thin out the lip a
bit, and printed it again.  As soon as I got two bottles into it, it
delaminated again, but this time that meant it split lengthwise; still
unusable.

I gritted my teeth and added massive ugly discs girdling the pipe.
This pumped the print time up to 75 minutes, put a bunch of extra
plastic in places that weren't weak, added ugly cylinder corners that
made it look like a ray-gun plumbing fitting, and made the knurling on
the bottlecap model I was using inaccessible to your fingers, but it
was an easy few lines in OpenSCAD.  This time it withstood several
double-bottle insertions, only failing once I tried to really crank
two bottles down onto the gaskets to see if I could get it to seal,
and it only cracked instead of failing completely like the older
models.  It used almost three meters of filament.

Much of the problem, of course, is that PLA is comparatively weak
compared to the polypropylene normally used for bottlecaps, but more —
it's brittle, in the sense that it can't be stretched very far before
it breaks.  But that's true of hydroxyapatite, too.

Suppose, instead, we were optimizing a feasible toolpath to provide
strength *and resilience* with constraints to provide a lip against
which the bottles could seal, without obstructing the bottles' threads
(including as they screw in) or necks, and resisting movement of the
bottles in all six degrees of freedom.

A first cut at the problem could be a huge block of solid plastic with
bottle-shaped cutouts in it; a sufficiently large block would provide
the required strength.  (FEM simulation would be needed to find out
how large.)  Then, simply removing material from that block in
different places would reduce the amount of plastic needed.
Hill-climbing search might steer us to remove plastic less stressed by
the bottle neck being screwed in tightly; some possible removals would
reduce strength while improving resilience, while others would result
in infeasible toolpaths.  The ultimate result would surely be
lighter-weight, more resilient, and more aesthetically pleasing than
what I have sitting on my desk now, and it would take much less time
to design and produce.

