There are five common adhesives or cements which work to turn sand
into sandstone at low temperatures: plaster of paris, portland cement,
slaked lime, clay, and sodium silicate.

Plaster of paris (dehydrated gypsum, i.e. calcium sulfate hemihydrate)
is soft and weak.  It is inert until exposed to water; then it sets in
about 45', producing a fair bit of heat.  It will set underwater, is
nontoxic, and is a bright white.  If used outdoors, rain will
gradually erode it.  It introduces under 100μm of surface roughness.
On MercadoLibre 30 kg goes for AR$162 (at AR$18.20/US$, that’s US$8.90
or US$0.30/kg).

Portland cement (calcium silicates with some aluminum and iron
silicates) is strong and hard.  It takes about 6 hours to set, which
can happen underwater, but part of the setting process involves
absorbing CO₂ from the atmosphere.  It is highly alkaline and can
cause chemical burns.  It has a substantial thermal coefficient of
expansion, which can cause cracks.  The results are not suitable for
high-temperature use (e.g. metal casting) because the trapped water
will cause steam explosions.  It is typically gray.  On MercadoLibre
50 kg goes for AR$142 (US$7.80 or US$0.26/kg); the white grade costs
about three times as much.

Slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) can be mixed with portland cement or
applied alone.  It sets entirely, over the course of hours to days, by
absorbing carbon dioxide from air, and consequently will not set
underwater.  It’s nearly as strong and hard as portland cement, but
has a much smaller thermal coefficient of expansion.  It’s even more
alkaline.  The finished material is porous, although it can be
waterproofed with soap, forming materials known as qadad and tadelakt.
It forms a brilliant white.  On MercadoLibre 25 kg goes for AR$67
(US$3.70 or US$0.15/kg).

Clay is a class of phyllosilicate hydrate minerals that plasticize
significantly with the addition of more water, absorbing the water and
expanding, then contracting again and hardening as the water
evaporates.  This process can happen very rapidly, but the strength of
the resulting material is very low.  However, the product can then be
fired in a kiln, first dehydrating the clay and then sintering the
clay particles into a ceramic.  Bentonite clays are the traditional
adhesive in the greensand used in metal casting; they are among the
most plastic and expansive.  Ball clays and kaolin fire to a bright
white color.  25kg of bentonite costs AR$180 on MercadoLibre (US$9.90
or US$0.40/kg).

Sodium silicate is a class of mixtures of silica and sodium oxide; it
sets over the course of days by absorbing carbon dioxide, and can be
hardened instantly by the application of concentrated carbon dioxide
gas or liquid acids.  Some grades are very alkaline, but those are
more difficult to find.  It dissolves in water, forming a dense
solution; generally this requires high temperatures and pressures, so
it is usually sold predissolved.  I haven’t compared its strength to
the other cements mentioned above.  It’s sold on MercadoLibre as
“bloqueador silicato” for AR$1670/20ℓ (US$91 or US$4.60/kg), although
I think I’ve found somewhat lower prices.

There are other cements, including magnesium oxychloride, magnesium
phosphate, magnesium oxysulfate, calcium aluminate, and
bacterially-decomposed urea with calcium salts, and wollastonite with
phosphoric acid.  Unfortunately, I don’t know where to get the
ingredients here, or they have other disadvantages such as the smell.

Construction sand itself goes for AR$575/m³, and a m³ is about 2.4
tonnes.  This is US$32 (US$0.013/kg).  So to the extent that you can
replace binder with sand filler, you can drop the materials cost of
your printed object almost proportionally, while increasing its
strength; with binders mostly in the US$0.15–0.40/kg range, except for
sodium silicate’s US$4.60, the sand doesn’t comprise half the cost of
the object until the binder is down to 3%–10% of the mix, and
generally none of these binders are so awesome as to allow you to use
so little binder.

For 3-D printing, whether powder-bed or nozzle-deposition, the optimal
material would be free; remain liquid or powder forever while in
storage, but harden instantly as soon as it was activated; would be
very strong; and would be colorless, so that you could pigment it
however you liked.
