What's the sense in which e is the optimal branching factor?  The
number of nodes you have to traverse to reach one of N nodes with
branching factor B is ceil(log N / log B), and if you're examining
each of the B branches in the node to figure out which one to follow,
you end up examining B ceil(log N / log B) branches.  If we remove the
discretization, we get log N (B / log B), and it turns out that B /
log B has a minimum at B = e, so in practice the optimal branching
factor is 3.

This still holds if you are only examining B/2 branches at each node.
It's only if there's an additional cost to visiting a new node that
the minimum cost moves to a larger branching factor.

To be a little more concrete, suppose you're trying to track down an
incorrect result from the execution of a program that runs for a
hundred billion instructions, or about a minute.  If the program is
built out of functions that call other functions and combine their
results, and you can tell from looking at each result whether it's
correct or not, maybe you can navigate to the result you want by
expanding the execution history as an outline.

If each function calls three other functions, then within 24 clicks,
you can make your way from the top-level result to the particular
incorrect result; at each step, you have to examine on average 1.5
intermediate results, so you need to look at about 35 results.

If each function calls only two other functions, you have to look at
about 37 results, which is slightly worse; and the same is true if
each function calls four other functions.  So the B/log B function is
pretty flat over the region of 2-4.  Then it starts to climb: at 5
callees, you need to examine 39 results; at 6, 42; and at 7, 46.  At
15 callees, the number of results you have to examine to find your way
to the bottom-level fault has doubled to 70.

However, the number of nodes you have to examine (and the number of
clicks you have to make) at that point has shrunk from 24 to 9.  So if
the cost of visiting a node is significant (e.g. you need to reorient
yourself in a new context, or clicking is slow) then the optimal
number of callees for debugging might be higher than 3.  Already at 9
you've cut in half the number of nodes visited (12 instead of 24) at
only a 50% extra cost in number of branches examined.  So if the cost
to visit a node is comparable to the cost to examine a branch (the
same order of magnitude) then the optimum is probably somewhere around
9, say, between 5 and 18.  (At 18, you're examining 79 branches, but
still visiting 9 nodes.  So going from 9 to 18 saves you about 3
nodes, but costs you 27 branch examinations, which only makes sense if
examining a node costs at least 9 branch examinations.)
