Can we improve the solutions of initial-value problems using affine
arithmetic?

An IVP consists of some set of differential equations, with all the
derivatives given with respect to a single “time” independent
variable, and a set of initial conditions that hold at some single
point in time.  Standard ways to solve them numerically include
Runge-Kutta integration.  I wonder if we can make some improvements by
using affine arithmetic.

Affine arithmetic
-----------------

Affine arithmetic is a generalization of interval arithmetic which can
give tighter bounds under many circumstances, and additionally can
capture some of the dependency of outputs on inputs.  Instead of
representing each quantity as a±b, as interval arithmetic does, affine
arithmetic represents each quantity as an affine combination of
variables c₀v₀ + c₁v₁ + c₂v₂ + ... cₙvₙ + k.  Most of the vᵢ are
assumed to range over some range like [-1, 1] or [0, 1], and initially
they each represent the uncertainty associated with a given input.

In ordinary affine arithmetic, a new vᵢ is introduced at every
nonlinear or rounded calculation to represent the uncertainty about
the result of that operation.  This allows the uncertainty due to a
given input, calculation, or rounding to cancel: (c₀₀v₀ + c₁v₁ + k₀) -
(c₀₁v₀ - c₁v₁ + k₁) = (c₀₀ - c₀₁)v₀ + k₀ - k₁, canceling the
uncertainty due to v₁ (and some of the uncertainty due to v₀ as well,
if c₀₀ and c₀₁ have the same sign).  Depending on the situation, this
subtraction may introduce an additional variable to account for the
rounding error of this subtraction; the number of such variables can
increase without limit, making successive operations successively more
costly.

By contrast, in *reduced* affine arithmetic (“RAA”), all the extra
uncertainty introduced during the calculation (due to rounding or
nonlinear operations) is dumped into a special cₙvₙ which doesn’t
cancel in this way, instead growing like ordinary interval arithmetic.
This caps the computational cost of reduced affine arithmetic at the
cost of providing more pessimistic error bounds — but maybe only very
slightly more pessimistic, if most of the uncertainty of the result is
due to the initially-present input uncertainty, not introduced during
the calculation.

Other variants of RAA may introduce new variables during the
calculation at some times, but not others.

IVPs with affine arithmetic
---------------------------

So I have some vague thoughts about how affine arithmetic might help
with IVPs.  You can recursively divide the state space of your system
into boxes and compute an affine approximation of the derivatives in
question inside each box, rather than just approximations around some
points.  Each box is a paraxial parallelepiped some of whose axes are
dependent variables, but one of whose axes is the time variable.

This allows you to compute trajectories of the system through this
multidimensional state space; the arc through a given box is in
general some kind of exponential, but you can of course approximate it
with an affine form, subdividing the trajectory more finely than the
derivatives if necessary.  Then, once you have an estimated result
with its error bounds, you can consult its coefficients to see where
the most uncertainty comes from — is it the value of x₃ in box 5, or
the value of x₅ in box 8?  This allows you to intelligently choose a
box to subdivide to improve the approximation.  Also, it allows you to
intelligently choose a dimension along which to subdivide it to
improve the approximation, which becomes progressively more important
with larger dimensionality.  (Even if you have only a single
independent variable, you might have a large state vector evolving
along it.)

This also allows uncertainty to be associated with the initial
values — in effect you can compute the trajectory of not just a single
point but an entire neighborhood of points.  This neighborhood, too,
might need to be subdivided if the system distorts it into a
shape whose nonlinearity exceeds your desired precision.

Extension to BVPs
-----------------

Boundary-value problems specify known values at not just a single
point but potentially many points, and possibly have many dimensions;
liquid flow, for example, or heat flow might have boundaries where the
flow is zero or the temperature or heat flow is constant.  You could
similarly imagine recursively subdividing the state space, again
partitioning it using both state variables and (now plural)
independent variables, computing an affine approximation to the
derivatives of the state variables for each box.  Perhaps the final
result is a piecewise-linear approximation to each state variable,
with the pieces being boxes defined over the independent variables,
with error bounds on it.
