"8-bit" or "New Aesthetic" games like Minecraft, Bit Trip Runner, and
arguably Dwarf Fortress are increasingly popular, perhaps reflecting a
newfound appreciation for gameplay in place of high production values.
To some extent this is also a way to disguise lack of production
values: if you put crappy models on top of Unreal Engine, the
environment they're in makes them look worse by implicitly comparing
them to the ones in Counterstrike or Call of Duty [0], and indie devs
can avoid suffering such comparisons in part by avoiding the engines
that create production-values expectations they will inevitably fail
to meet.

[0]: CoD is on Unreal Engine, right?  Did I misspell that?

Occasionally there are games programming competitions that focus on
some kind of artificial restriction like this, sometimes even using
specific old platforms.  The problem is that, for obvious reasons,
these restrictions tend to resemble restrictions we have actually
suffered in the past, so the aesthetic of the games tends to be
somewhat predictable: square pixels, small color palettes, 2.5D,
7-segment displays, FM or square-wave or triangle-wave synthesis.

But what if, instead of creating video games that recall the age of
Space Invaders, we tried to create video games that recalled the
analogous stage of technological development on an alien planet, or
perhaps an alternate-history Earth?  We could have been laboring under
different restrictions and produced different kinds of games.

A number of things have happened recently in games that suggest some
possibilities.  Flappy Bird could easily have been written in 1985
[1], but there were no similar games.  3-D wireframe games were
feasible in 1985 (Maze War, the first first-person shooter, was from
the 1970s, and the Star Wars game was a popular arcade game of the
time) but they greatly benefited from vector displays, which went out
of style at the time.

[1] I think James Hague pointed this out but I'm offline at the moment.

So, some example alternative histories:

0. As I said, what if vector displays?

1. What if hexagonal pixels had been the standard?  They have more
consistent spacing and thus reduce sampling error for the same number
of pixels, which is why tabletop strategy games (arguably including
Settlers) use hexagonal tiles.

2. What if Tek-4014-style storage tubes had been the mainstream
display technology?  You can't erase part of the screen; you have to
erase the whole screen.

3. What if touchscreens?  But we're already exploring that with game
dynamics like Flappy Bird and Angry Birds.

4. What if timesharing?

5. Music synthesis with electronic difference engines, sort of like
vector-display display lists, but for waveforms?

    a. Music synthesis with circulating bit sequences in shift registers
    (like the Apple ]['s NTSC colors) rather than analog waveforms?

6. Vector displays with higher-order display lists?  You could display
quadratic splines as easily as points, but maybe only a small number
of new ones per second.

7. What if the CPU itself were fundamentally different in some way?

    a. If most of your memory were write-once read-many, so that every
    time you played a game, you irreversibly used up some of the memory?

    b. If most of your memory were fundamentally sequential-access, like
    bubble memory or magnetic tapes?  (Arguably we're suffering that now
    with disks, and of course videodisc games of the 1980s explored some
    of this too.)

    c. If the CPU were a combinator-graph reduction machine like the SKIM
    rather than a RAM machine?

8. Character-cell displays created an aesthetic that survives in Dwarf
Fortress and Nethack, but also that influences any number of modern
"8-bit" games, because they use fixed-width fonts.  But to a great
extent those displays were very culturally contingent, and while
perhaps Greek and Latin alphabets are among the simplest systems to
draw this way, it seems like it's probably a coincidence that the
cultures that invented computers happened to use alphabets rather than
other writing systems.  So consider, what if your character display
were for a language that was:

    a. Top-to-bottom?

    b. A syllable-block system like Korean hangul?

    c. One of those where accents are essential to understandability?
    Maybe, like APL, your display would need to support arbitrary
    overstrikes, or at least two or three overstruck characters.  How
    could this reduce the size of the character set?

    d. Necessarily variable-width, or necessarily supported character
    overlaps?  I don't know if Devanagari, for example, is actually this
    way, but I've never seen non-proportional Devanagari.  Proportional
    font rendering isn't actually that much harder than fixed-width font
    rendering.  Historically it came along with framebuffers, which
    certainly make it easier, but are framebuffers really necessary?

    e. Ideographic?  Would you necessarily move to a small syllabary for
    computers, like 1980s Japanese PCs used katakana, or could you perhaps
    handle some kind of large ideographic character set in reasonably
    simple hardware?

9. Hardware sprites and hardware scrolling were a big deal in 1980s
games, since you didn't have time to redraw the entire screen each
frame.  Similarly, for fractals, hardware palette color-cycling was a
big deal, a technique which also permits fade-to-black, flashing a
certain color index, and so on, without having to redraw the entire
screen; and a bit earlier, XORing objects into the framebuffer allowed
you to move them around the screen without having to save the
background they passed over in separate memory.  But suppose the
available display hardware had supported other interesting operations
instead?  Of course, there's an infinite variety of possible
operations, most of which (like XOR) are mostly visually
uninteresting.  But there are a wide variety that seem like they would
have been interesting but were never implemented in hardware:

    a. Displacement mapping, which is kind of a generalization of
    sprites: you have a number that you add to the pixel coordinates
    generated by the hardware counter to get the address in the
    framebuffer (or tiles, or whatever) to draw the pixel.