I’m sitting in a café with a wall covered in embossed tiles, which I
think are plastic painted to look like brass with a heavy patina.
Some parts of the tiles have a sort of leather pattern, while other
parts have raised floral designs and the like.

Despite the enthusiasm for 3-D printing via FDM, most of the things
people make with it have very limited mechanical properties; instead
they primarily are of interest because of their appearance — the
infill is commonly a honeycomb or cross pattern with 60% to 90% empty
space inside the outer shell.  But appearance is mostly a function of
the surface — entirely so, in the case of opaque objects.  So perhaps
a process that shapes only a surface may be of interest.

Single-point incremental forming, or “SPIF”, is an emerging industrial
process for rapid prototyping, which is to say it barely works at all
and it’s slow, but flexible.  The idea is that you clamp a metal sheet
around the edges and poke it with a stick; in cross section in ASCII
art:


     |clamp|     | |            |clamp|
     -------      U             -------
     ----------------------------------
     -------                    -------
     |clamp|                    |clamp|

Where you poke it, you make a divot by stretching (“forming”) the
metal out the other side of the sheet, and if you drag the stick along
the surface without letting up the pressure, you can make a groove.
(Generally you use a rounded-end tool and you lubricate and/or rotate
it to keep it from sticking.)  You can see the same process in action
if you try to write on paper with a ballpoint pen with no ink.

Where this gets interesting is that if you make the groove, say,
circular, the metal inside the groove has nothing pulling it up, so it
gets pulled down to the level of the bottom of the groove, making a
flat circular depression.  Then you can do the process again inside
there to make the depression deeper, and so on.  The same
considerations of thinning, wrinkling, springback, and work-hardening
that apply to deep drawing apply here, but since SPIF is mostly used
for one-offs where you can’t afford the investment to make stamping
dies (though sometimes people use it with dies too) you need to use
FEM software to simulate them.

(The low-tech approach to this whole thing is hammering sheet metal
into shape over a form.)

I was thinking that maybe you could do this with aluminum foil with
really minimal force.  Aluminum foil also has the advantage that it’s
thin enough that you can easily cut it with a spark; and, if you need
to anneal it, you can be sure of a uniform temperature through the
thickness of the material, and since [aluminum doesn’t need a soak
time at high temperatures to anneal it][0], it can be done very
quickly.  (This requires heating to close to the melting point; people
sometimes use burnoff of carbon black on aluminum to indicate that
it’s reached the right temperature.)

[0]: https://www.tinmantech.com/education/articles/aluminum-alloys-annealing.php

SPIF forming of a depression is normally done from the outside in,
with an empty space under the workpiece, which is clamped only at the
edges; this requires workpiece to transmit the load from the forming
tool back all the way to the edges.  A possible improvement may be to
do an initial forming step on a resilient backing, such as a sheet of
rubber, or a disposable one, such as a sheet of cardboard, creating
many parallel grooves with a bit of separation between them; this
produces an accordion-fashion section which can then be unfolded with
much less force once the backing is removd.

This is not very far from what you might do with a beading machine to
raise a rib to stiffen a sheet-metal surface, the difference being
that you’re raising a lot of parallel ribs next to each other, and
with the objective of selectively increasing compliance rather than
decreasing it.  The work-hardening of the metal obviously works
against you here.

Electrotyping and molding
-------------------------

Electrotyping may be a particularly appealing next process step to
apply, allowing the soft, easily melted aluminum to give its
precisely-dimensioned form to metals like copper, brass, bronze,
nickel, chromium, gold, or silver; I’m not sure how well electrotyped
coatings will adhere to the aluminum’s passivating oxide layer, and I
don’t think it’s likely for cathodic reduction to eliminate aluminum
oxide in water, but if it doesn’t adhere well, that merely facilitates
the removal of the aluminum for disposal.

Electrotyping is difficult to apply to alloys (whichever metal is
easier to reduce tends to crowd out the other metals), although there
are some processes that can electrodeposit some brasses and bronzes.
But, by the same token, the electrodeposited metal may work well as a
shell to fill with a harder alloy in the molten state.  The easiest
combination is presumably a copper or nickel shell filled with
type-metal, which (as discussed in file `glass-fluxing-3d-printing`
and file `hot-oil-cutter`) melts at 241°, does not shrink upon
solidifying, and does not dissolve iron or steel; I am guessing that
it will not dissolve nickel either.  It probably dissolves copper
pretty well, since lead–tin solder does, but probably not very deeply
in the time before it cools at the surface of the mold.

Copper doesn’t melt until 1084°, and nickel doesn’t melt until 1455°,
meaning that in theory you could fill shells of them with materials of
much higher melting points
than the aluminum itself can survive — including, in the case of nickel, cast
iron (see file `glass-fluxing-3d-printing`), which will definitely
dissolve it.  Dimensional precision may suffer from thermal
contraction, although I seem to recall that cast iron in particular
shares type-metal’s happy property of neither expanding nor
contracting upon solidification.

Various pot-metal alloys (Zamak, etc.) are also an option; in theory
[Zamak] 2 melts at only 379–390° but has a yield strength of 361 MPa,
better than ASTM A36 steel’s 290 MPa (according to file `heck-balls`)
or 250 MPa (according to Wikipedia’s [A36 steel] article), though the
steel beats it at ultimate tensile strength.  I think Zamak is more
expensive than cast iron, though.

[Zamak]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zamak
[A36 steel]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A36_steel

Alternatively, you might be able to cast directly into the aluminum
foil, as long as the pressure isn’t too high.  According to file
`filled-fdm`, pure aluminum doesn’t melt until 660°, and the alloy
used for aluminum foil isn’t too much below that.  Casting will
clearly involve some pressure that can deform the aluminum, but this
may be small enough not to matter.  Solder, type metal, ABS, PLA,
lead, hard candy (sugar syrup), paraffin wax, thermoset resins such as
silicone or PMMA, and Zamak should all be moldable directly in
aluminum foil; some of these will stick permanently to it, but
probably all of them will stick to it well enough to require deforming
the aluminum foil irreversibly (plastically) for demolding.

Casting crystalline materials involves substantial loss of surface
detail from crystallization, both from crystal grain growth directly
distorting the surface and from the contraction or expansion that
usually accompanies the phase transition.  Glasses such as hard candy
avoid this problem.

Promising qualitative results from a simple manual casting experiment
---------------------------------------------------------------------

I deformed some aluminum foil (thin, about 10 μm†, times or divided by 2)
with a ballpoint pen on top of some paper by drawing a sort of face on
it, washed it with 96% ethanol, laid it on a glazed porcelain floor,
and then melted some 60–40 tin–lead solder (183°–190°) on top of it,
using a shitty non-temperature-controlled soldering iron.  The solder
was able to pick up most of the contours of the drawing accurately,
but something black matter was stuck to the bottom of the solder and
screwed up the impression.  I think it came from rosin contamination
of the tool that carbonized instead of boiling off, but it could also
be a chunk of metal oxide from the tool, either copper or iron.  The
foil peeled easily off the solidified solder.  The solder surface
showed solder’s usual dull finish, despite the bright finish of the
aluminum foil that had molded it; I think this is probably due to
wrinkling as the surface cooled before the interior and would be
eliminated by adding antimony, as in type metal.

An earlier attempt using the same blob of solder was much less
successful, because the bottom of the solder blob was full of bubbles,
obliterating most of the submillimeter-scale contours I was trying to
pick up.  These might have resulted from oil contamination of the
aluminum foil (e.g., from my hands) or from the rosin in the solder,
which does volatilize significantly at the temperatures needed to melt
the solder, let alone the higher temperatures the tool was presumably
reaching.

Specks of the black material were also evident on the upper surface of
the solder, and upon breaking it with pliers, apparently also in its
interior.  I was hoping to draw some sort of conclusion about its
density or solder-wettability, but I don’t know what to make of this.

The solder blob was about 1.5 mm thick.  If the solder’s density is
9 g/cc, which I haven’t measured but should be about right (see file
`phase-change-soldering-iron`) this works out to about 130 Pa of
pressure on the aluminum, or 0.02 psi in folk units, which should put
fairly small forces on the aluminum foil, not deforming it much except
in very flat areas; the total weight of the solder over a square
centimeter would be about 1.4 grams.  However, I melted the solder
directly on the surface by resting the soldering iron on top of it, so
in this case the aluminum foil experienced much greater forces than
the weight of the solder.  Pouring already molten solder would avoid
this problem

† I folded a piece of it in half 8 times and measured it at almost
2 mm with my caliper.  If I knew where to find the battery for the
caliper I’d be able to give a more precise measurement, but I don’t
think it’s that critical — I’d expect anything from 10 μm to 125 μm (a
Coke can I had lying around, though that includes the epoxy and paint)
to give roughly similar results.

Exponential typing and Gutenberg
--------------------------------

Suppose you use SPIF to cast some simple stamps in, say, solder,
Zamak, or type metal, some 100 times thicker than the aluminum foil,
and thus 100 to 10'000 times as rigid, depending on the deformation
mode you’re considering.  (Well, before you account for the difference
in moduli of rigidity between the aluminum and the other materials,
but those are small by comparison.)  You can then use these stamps to
stamp or incrementally form more foil, which you can then use to cast
or electroform further shapes, either in positive or in negative.

To take a simple example, you could use the SPIF process to form
stems, serifs, and bowls of letterforms in foil, which you can then
cast into stamps, which you can then stamp into an aluminum foil
matrix to form letters, which you can then cast or electrotype into a
font; the additional step of making up a stereotype for a page of text
allows you to reuse the same letters for each page without losing the
ability to reprint previous pages.  A recent analysis of Gutenberg’s
books suggests he probably used such a process, although of course he
wasn’t using aluminum foil for the expendable soft matrix.  (Likely
materials that occur to me include clay bodies, plaster of Paris, and
gold foil; I think papier-mâché, as used for stereotypes, wouldn’t
have worked for reasons of temperature limitations.  Later printers
used a thick, durable, work-hardening copper matrix instead, cutting a
single punch from steel for each letter.)

But other shapes might also work reasonably.  For example, you could
use a tiny spherical SPIF tool to make a mold for a larger spherical
SPIF tool; you could quite reasonably make stamping dies (at least for
soft metals and slow stamping) to put ribs in things, stamping the
ribs themselves with a series of stamps from torus-shaped rib positive
and negative dies; and even features like countersunk holes to cast
into thin sheets might be feasible.  To cast half of a screw thread,
you could possibly use a stamp with the form of a single turn of the
screw thread, repeatedly; two such molds clamped together could cast
an entire screw.

In cases where the cast material releases easily from the
aluminum-foil matrix, you may be able to cast both a positive and a
negative die simultaneously from the same sheet, thus ensuring a
fairly close fit even if the sheet deforms significantly during
molding.