There are a variety of sundial designs that incorporate the solar
analemma in one or another form, so that they can provide the precise
time according to current civil time standards — which hold that each
day and each second should have the same length despite the
eccentricity and consequent inconstant speed of the Earth’s orbit and,
thus, the solar day.

A spot on the wall
------------------

I was thinking in particular of using the sunbeam reflected from a
small round mirror to illuminate a spot on a wall; the point
illuminated on the wall will vary according to both the time of day
and the angle of elevation of the sun.

         |       |
         | light |w
         \-------|a      
    mirror       |l
                 |l

Each day the sunbeam will sweep a (noncircular) arc across this wall,
but from day to day the arc will vary as the elevation angle of the
sun does.  The total variation in elevation from solstice to solstice
is about 47°; it is fastest near the equinoxes and slowest near the
solstices.  I roughly guess that that means that, at its fastest, it
moves about half a degree per day, which is rather pleasantly the size
of the sun as seen from Earth.

This means that, if the mirror is small enough, the spot on the wall
will also take up about half a degree (32 arcminutes) as seen from the
mirror.  So, in theory, you could mark the arcs on the wall for each
day of the year; they will gradually be displaced by a quarter of a
day each year until being reset by the leap year.

This means that, in theory, you could mark two times of day on the
wall at each point, one for when the sun crosses that point moving
north and one for when it is moving south.  Or you could switch out
the wall twice a year, on the solstices, and mark one time of day on
the wall at each point.

Since an hour is 15° (360÷24), half a degree is about two minutes, so
each point along the centerline of the spot’s track will be
illuminated for about two minutes.  This would seem to pose some
difficulties for telling time with a sundial with less error than two
minutes, but if the mirror is small, the spot is a well-defined circle
with the size of the sun’s disc, and you can see the location of its
center to a precision of something like a tenth of its width; this
should permit a timekeeping precision of something like ten seconds.

For those ten seconds to constitute about a millimeter of motion, the
distance from the small mirror to the wall needs to be about 1.4
meters, although perhaps this can be productively folded up using
additional mirrors.  At this distance, the 32-arcminute sun disk will
project as a 13-mm-diameter circle convolved with the shape of the
mirror.  (If you want a sharp boundary on it without sacrificing as
much brightness, you might consider using a mirror in the shape of an
annulus; an annulus convolved with a solid circle has the same
diameter, but a much sharper boundary, than two solid circles
convolved.)

Caustics
--------

Suppose that the wall is itself a mirror, but not a flat one.  Then it
will reflect the spot elsewhere, for example onto a screen, but
distorted and possibly changed in direction.  It can form caustics in
the reflection, and these caustics can have stronger contrasts than
mere solar caustics, because the light falling on the wall comes from
a smaller point source than the sun’s disc.  (It might be worthwhile
to make the mirror subtend, for example, 8 arcminutes; at the
1.4-meter distance suggested above, this is about 3.3 millimeters.
(Assuming we’re using a circular mirror, not an annulus.)

To focus the spot back to a 3.3-mm point at the same distance would
merely require a radius of curvature of that same 1.4 meters.  The
versine of half of 32 arcminutes is about 1.1 × 10⁻⁵, so if you made
the 13-mm spot a spherical reflector, its center would need to be cut
deeper than its edges by about 15 microns, a number which varies only
a little as the focal length and direction vary.  See file `caustics`
for some notes on how to shape nearly-flat surfaces to arbitrary
shapes with this kind of precision.

In particular, it wouldn’t be that hard for a series of facets to
reflect the beam to the same place on the screen as the sun’s image
passed over them, so that instead of scanning across the screen, the
projected image stayed in the same place; but it could vary from one
facet to the next.  And if the facet is convex rather than concave, it
could be larger than the 13-mm illuminated area on the wall, rather
than smaller, though at the cost of brightness.

(And there don’t need to be actual facets; you can use a smooth curve
only occasionally interrupted with the kind of discontinuity you see
in Fresnel lenses.  Facets are just a crude discrete approximation of
the problem.)

Unavoidably, though, since each point along the center of the track is
illuminated for two minutes, there will be a certain amount of fading
from one image to the next over the course of those two minutes.

One particularly attention-getting image to project might be the
current time, written in Arabic numerals, with a colon, like the
various “digital sundial” projects that exist.

This poses the problem of how to avoid a vague superposition of
numerals during the two-minute transition from one facet to the next.
A possible solution is to use a larger number of smaller facets, so
that the facets close to the transition zone are projecting not just
the current time but the *negative* of the adjacent time; on one side
of the boundary of the 12:46 to 12:48 transition, for example, you
would project a mostly gray image with “12:4” in white, “6” in white,
and “8” in black, while on the other side, you would project the “8”
in white and the “6” in black.  Thus, as the preponderance of light
shifted from one side of the boundary to the other, the “6” would fade
to gray and be replaced by the “8”.

(To keep the black image from being obtrusive a bit further over,
you’d want to counterbalance it with a dimmer and perhaps blurrier
white image, etc.; I think the brightness curve ends up looking
something like the derivative of sinc.  Essentially you’re trying to
Wiener-filter out the low-pass temporal filter imposed by the sun's
nonzero width in order to get a sharper transition.)

This approach to getting faster transitions by counterbalancing with
inverse images probably precludes the use of *caustics* in the sense
of places where the Jacobian determinant (of the position of the beam
on the screen as a function of its position on the mirrored wall)
vanishes, since that could easily create more brightness than you
could counterbalance, but you can still vary the magnitude of that
determinant substantially to vary the brightness.  But your contrast
ratio might be limited to 2:1, which sucks.

This poses the additional question of whether the facets would need to
be so small that diffraction would pose a problem.  If the individual
facets were 1 mm across and were effectively planar at the level of
100-μm-diameter “microfacets”, which seems feasible, the Airy limit
(1.220λ/D for a circular aperture, as explained in file
`caustic-business-card`) would be, say, 1.22·555 nm / 100 μm, about
23 arcminutes of diffraction-limited divergence.  So, yes, diffraction
would start to pose a problem; the wall might need to be larger and
further away, and you might need to use larger microfacets.  But it’s
not so overwhelming that I think it makes the problem infeasible, just
challenging.

Scratch holograms
-----------------

Suppose that instead of using caustics, you use Bill Beaty’s scratch
holograms.  You stick a bronze plaque on a wall, paint it with clear
polyurethane, and put a peephole nearby.  The reflection off the
scratches on the plaque from the sun when you’re looking through the
peephole displays the current time.

A simple approximation, which is easy to improve on, is to divide the
plaque into pixels, and add scratches to each pixel to reflect the sun
at every angle where it should be lit up.  As long as the scratches
aren’t too dense, the scratches at different angles will only
interfere a little bit with each other, but it still might be a good
idea to display different times on different parts of the display to
reduce the “burn-in” effect of too many scratches in the same place.
If the plaque is facing north (or south, if you’re in the northern
hemisphere *like a sucker*) and the peephole is in front of and below
it, the sun will move through nearly a whole 180° arc each day, but
faster close to noon.

Correcting for the Equation of Time can’t be done by displaying
different images at different times of year depending on the
elevation, but it could be done to some extent by moving the peephole;
the angle at which a point P on a scratch reflects is when it is
perpendicular to the plane including your eye, the sun, and P.  So
moving the sun a little to the left is equivalent to moving your eye a
little to the right, and vice versa.  So it might be adequate to mark
dates along the bottom of a viewing slit to show you where to position
your eye.  (Maybe a part of the plate you view from the side instead
of from below could tell you what the sun’s elevation is and thus what
the date is.)

As with the analemma, I’m not going to do the math for the angles
right now.

The scratches, though, I will.  The scratch depth needs to be at least
on the order of a wavelength of light (say, half a wavelength) in
order to scatter incoming light properly — the ray entering at a point
should leave as a plane.  It is unreasonably challenging to make the
scratch walls much steeper than 45°, and indeed with the usual kind of
abrasive scratches, you’ll get 