In using matplotlib to do a series of plots, I’ve found a number of
annoying aliasing phenomena.

One phenomenon is that, although the edges of lines and markers are
antialiased, the antialiasing is relatively soft.  So the lines still
contain substantial energy above the Nyquist frequency of the display.
When a single line is drawn, this is rarely important, but when many
parallel lines are drawn, even if they are perfectly vertical and
equally spaced at non-integer pixel spacing, the aliased frequencies
can be visible and indeed produce a dominant moiré pattern over the
whole area.

Completely eliminating this phenomenon with even a single hatching
pattern would require bandlimiting the line’s pixel image to strictly
below the Nyquist frequency for the display, and of course a strictly
bandlimited signal necessarily fills all of space — worse, a
bandlimited impulse is a sinc, which drops off in intensity fairly
slowly with distance, only inversely proportional to the distance.
But it might be reasonable to touch, say, a swath of 8–16 pixels along
each edge of the line, rather than 2.

Eliminating moiré for *multiple* hatching patterns would require
combining the patterns linearly, which is to say, without opacity.
Although this departs from the historical practice developed from
pen-and-ink graphics, experience shows that this is a very useful way
to plot data on, for example, an oscilloscope display, but it may not
be entirely practical for all kinds of data graphics.  However,
there’s a whole range in between, easily accessible in a system that
uses premultiplied alpha.  RGBA(0, 0, 128, 255) is pure opaque dark
blue; RGBA(0, 0, 128, 0) is perfectly transparent luminous dark blue
with no opacity; and RGBA(0, 0, 128, 128) can be viewed equally
validly as half-transparent bright blue or as a partly luminous,
partly opaque dark blue.  Indeed, that color is representable even in
a system where alpha is not premultiplied (it’s RGBA(0, 0, 255, 128))
but other, brighter colors are not.

Note that in this case you want to be able to represent not only
overunity brightnesses but also negative brightnesses if you want to
plot dark lines on a light background.

The other phenomenon is that, although my LCD uses RGB subpixel
ordering, and my font rendering takes advantage of it, matplotlib does
not.  This results in wasting something like half of my display’s
horizontal resolution, two thirds for dim blue-tinted graphics.  This
is really frustrating when I’m trading off legibility for data
coverage.

LCD subpixel ordering is not the limit of subpixel antialiasing,
either, and I think that even the soft antialiasing matplotlib uses
provides visually-subpixel positioning of the line.

Matplotlib of course does not insist on drawing one-pixel-wide lines.
You can get it to draw lines several pixels wide.  It’s just that the
particular line profile it uses is a slightly antialiased boxcar: a
constant opaque color inside the line, dropping off to perfect
transparency outside it.  You could easily imagine a better compromise
between precision and visibility — for example, a strong thin line
with a diffuse background around it, possibly in a contrasting color,
making it easy both to find the line and see its overall shape and to
see its precise value.
