Today, 2014-02-20, I learned that my friend Jim Weirich died
yesterday.  No word yet on the cause of death, except for a
pseudonymous rumor on Hacker News that he died of a heart attack,
which is quite plausible.  If I remember correctly, Jim was the guy
who guided me through understanding the applicative-order Y combinator
during the previous millennium, and who has also given me one of the
nicest compliments I've ever received.  I suppose this is an example
of that saying: they won't remember what you said, and they won't
remember what you did, but they will remember how you made them feel;
because I'm not even sure about the Y combinator thing.

I don't know how to describe the loss to the world that is Jim's
death.  He worked on code that was useful to millions of people,
shared his knowledge, and was always willing to mentor people; but,
also, and maybe more importantly, he was one of the least assholish
people I know.  A militant atheist mutual friend of ours complained to
me once that Jim was a fundamentalist Christian, which could be true
for all I know; I never asked him, and he never brought it up.  In
many ways, he was a paragon of loving your neighbor as yourself.

I don't remember when the last time I talked to Jim was.  It's
probably public on Twitter.

Today I didn't get much done at work.  A little bit, but not enough.
Tomorrow I go in early, which might help or might hurt.

Jim was 57, about 20 years older than I am.  Every year now for
several years, some of my friends have died.  They say that your risk
of death per year increases by about tenfold every ten years, and if
that's true, it's also true of your group of friends, if they continue
to have the same age distribution relative to you.  So in my 20s this
rarely happened, and now it's happening once or twice a year.  I guess
that means that when I'm 47, I can expect one of my friends to die
every month, unless I start hanging out with a younger crowd.

I've just arrived home from work at about 21:30.  Stace had messaged
me a few hours earlier to let me know power was out at the house.  As
I approached home on my bicycle, I noticed that several blocks of
buildings and streetlights were dark.

I had been hoping power would be back on, because I was looking
forward to answering a sweet email someone had sent me earlier today,
and I didn't bring a copy of it with me.  And I was hoping perhaps to
work on a search-engine project for my chapter in an upcoming book,
and it turns out I don't have the current version of the code with me
on this netbook.

The upstairs neighbor is peeing, a sound that always makes me nervous
when I hear it in my bedroom.

My bedroom is beginning to smell of exhaust from poorly maintained
gasoline engines, probably from neighbors who have turned on their
generators.

I went to work today by bicycle for the first time in a while.  My
rear tire had gone flat, so I pumped it up; but after a few blocks,
the seam on the inner tube split and it went totally flat again.
After I wandered around for a while (forgetting the bike map I have in
my backpack, which showed two bike shops within a few blocks) I found
a bike shop and got a new inner tube for $70 (US$6.50).  I'd've bought
an extra one to carry as a spare, but I didn't have the cash on me.

On the way home, it went flat again, but more slowly, so I was able to
make it home by pumping it up.  I guess I need to see if I have a
puncture and patch it by this weekend.

Last night, Stace, her dad, and I went over to a friend's house, who
showed us his new video game.  Although he told me the name several
times, I can't remember it now.  It's a guitar trainer that analyzes
the analog signal from your electric guitar to teach you to play the
chords and riffs of popular rock songs, including tricks like pitch
bending.  "Look, Stace!" I said.  "This is the future of education!"
She was unimpressed.  (My track record at predicting the futures of
things is not that great.)

Oh!  Power's back on!