Many successive-approximation algorithms for mathematical optimization
--- including the variants of gradient descent that are currently
fashionable for training ANNs, but especially things like
Newton-Raphson iteration, the method of secants, and the method of
Halley --- are quick to converge to a global optimum once they are
close to it, but can take a long time to get anywhere close to that
optimum.

This suggests that it may be advantageous to do the first iterations
of these algorithms using relatively imprecise but cheap means, then
do only the last few iterations using higher precision.  What kinds of
imprecise means might work for the early iterations?

Analog computation
------------------

Differential analyzers and similar analog "computers" are commonly
accurate to 2% or so, although it depends on the computation, since
errors in numerical integration of ODEs, for example, can grow
exponentially with time (and this applies equally to analog
"computers", even though no actual numbers are involved).
Successive-approximation algorithms are something of a best case,
though, since rather than growing over time, errors tend to die out
over time.

So it seems likely that a properly configured analog computation
circuit could approximate the solution within the limit of whatever
its signal-to-noise ratio is; commonly 60dB (0.1%) to 80dB (0.01%) is
reached.  You could imagine some kind of crossbar interconnect made
out of CMOS analog switches --- multiplexor/demultiplexors --- to
interconnect op-amps, resistors, capacitors, OTAs, and entire analog
processing blocks.

0.01% is close enough that two further iterations of a
quadratic-convergence method such as Newton-Raphson iteration would
reach the precision limits of double-precision floating point.

One difficulty is that, with the exception of integration over time
provided by capacitors and differentiation over time provided by
inductors or gyrators or the like, analog circuits normally have no
memory --- their output is a function of their input, not a function
of all their past inputs.  This means that you need separate circuits
for each scalar variable in your problem state; a single vector
equation like *a* = *b* + *c* might require hundreds or thousands of
op-amps, unless you can arrange for those vector variables to be
indexed by time.

Analog delay lines of various kinds can improve this situation
considerably; the old standards for slow signals were
thermostatically-controlled piezoelectric mercury delay lines and
later torsional magnetostrictive delay lines, with Pupin-like cascades
of inductors and capacitors or coaxial transmission lines for faster
signals.  The approach of using a CCD or similar camera sensor
described in file `ccd-oscilloscope` is a potential pure-analog
solution that permits some degree of out-of-order access.

In this context, though, it may not be necessary; maybe we can offload
the problem of memory onto digital circuitry and feed it through a DAC
feeding the analog circuitry, then digitize the result with an ADC to
store it again.

Low-precision floating-point and fixed-point
--------------------------------------------

"Half-precision" 16-bit floating-point is commonly available in GPUs,
"TPUs", and modern SIMD instructions; typically it runs at the same
cycle time as double-precision floating point, but four times the
parallelism.  So it's an obvious candidate.

Even lower precisions may be useful for computing initial
approximation.  Some kind of 8-bit floating-point format, for example,
or 8-bit saturating fixed point.