An optical system reversibly transforms a light input to a light
output.  In the geometrical-optics approximation, the light input (or
output) is a function from ℝ⁴ (four-tuples of real numbers) to
spectra.  If we reduce the spectra down to RGB, which is reasonable
for some purposes, this is a function ℝ⁴ → ℝ³; if we reduce it down to
monochrome, which is reasonable for other purposes, it’s a function
ℝ⁴ → ℝ.  We could think of this as a four-dimensional scalar field.
One view of the four dimensions is that they are the X and Y
coordinates where light enters (or exits) the system boundary and the
θ and φ angles at which it enters.  That is, the system can do
different things with light that enters at the same angle at different
points, or with different angles at the same point.

So, in monochrome, the overall system behavior is a function (ℝ⁴ → ℝ)
→ (ℝ⁴ → ℝ).  But this is still an extremely loose description, because
there are many such functions that we cannot realize as an optical
system, and there are others that we can realize only with great
difficulty.

(In wave mechanics, the input and output are very much simpler; at a
given wavelength, each point on the boundary of the system only has a
single complex phase and amplitude.  This fact allows holographic
optics to achieve astonishing performance for single-wavelength
systems.  Unfortunately the situation with multiple wavelengths
becomes complicated again, while geometric optics either depends not
at all on wavelength or only depends on wavelength in a very simple
way, with color filters and whatnot.  So here I will focus on
geometric optics.)

Conservation of energy
----------------------

For reasons of convenience, I’m going to focus on optical systems that
don’t dissipate energy, so the amount of light coming out is the same
as the amount of light going in.  This seems like kind of a stupid
focus, since all actual systems do absorb some light, often most of
it.  Then they convert that light into heat.  But it turns out that,
if we treat this as a sort of aberration, we can derive some very
interesting properties of optical systems that don’t have it, and then
we can figure out how real systems behave by adding in light
absorption as a sort of correction.

Reversibility
-------------

Another limitation, given conservation of energy, is that optical
systems must be *reversible*.  That is, if a certain beam of light
going into the system produces a certain distribution of light coming
back out of the system, if we send this second distribution of light
back in, it will come out as the first beam of light, just going the
other way.  This seems not to be true in our day-to-day experience,
and this requires some examination.  For example, a laser pointer
shining on white paint produces a spot that can be seen from any
direction, so we know it’s throwing off light in every direction, in a
way that’s called Lambertian reflection, and yet light going into the
spot from every direction doesn’t go back into the laser pointer.  We
explain this by saying that the paint is full of many different
microscopic facets, each of which throws off light in a particular
direction when the laser hits it, and there are so many of them even
in that little spot that the light seems to go in every direction at
once!  And if we could shoot a very, very thin beam of light at each
facet, in just the reverse of the direction that the laser was making
it shine before, all of those beams would be redirected perfectly back
to where the laser pointer had been.

Now, in reality, these facets are often so tiny that the geometrical
optics approximation breaks down, and we have to use wave mechanics to
see what will happen.  But it turns out that wave mechanics is
reversible too; reversibility is not just a consequence of the
geometrical-optics approximation, but a property of the
wave-mechanical nature of light that survives in the
geometrical-optics approximation.

But if our system consists entirely of macroscopic
features — mirror-smooth surfaces that are perhaps curved or have
edges, everything either polished metallic mirror-bright or
transparent — then, indeed, any transformation that the system
produces can in fact be time-reversed in this way.  And you can do it
in practice, not just in theory, because you don’t need
microscopically tiny slivers of light the way you do for the white
paint.

This imposes some restrictions on the mathematical form of our system.
It can’t, for example, transform two different distributions of
incoming light into the same distribution of outgoing light, because
then if you time-reversed the outgoing light, it wouldn’t know which
of these two different distributions it should produce.  The function
must be bijective, invertible.

But is that the only restriction?  Can we realize any arbitrary
invertible (ℝ⁴ → ℝ) → (ℝ⁴ → ℝ) function as an optical system?  No, not
even close.

One of the strongest restrictions is linearity.

Linearity
---------

Most optical systems are linear, in the sense that different beams of
light don’t interact with each other.  If you have some beam A and the
system transforms it to f(A), and some other beam B and the system
transforms it to f(B), then if you shoot both of those beams of light
at the system at once, A + B, then the distribution of light that
comes out will be exactly f(A) + f(B).  You can have a lens, for
example, bend one light beam a bit to the left, and the other a bit to
the right, but you can’t have it bend the first light beam to the
right when the second one is present, or to the left otherwise.

Now, this is just an approximation, but under most circumstances, it’s
a very, very good approximation, and it takes very sensitive
instruments to detect departures from linearity.  It’s actually a much
better approximation than geometrical optics is, because you can see
the diffraction phenomena produced by wave mechanics very easily in
everyday life, if you know where to look; they’re quite strong
whenever you have objects on the scale of a few microns involved, such
as your eyelashes.  They’re rarely more than one or two orders of
magnitude away from visibility.  Departures from linearity, by
contrast, are usually six or more orders of magnitude away from
visibility.  So nonlinear optical systems are substantially more
difficult to build.

There are a few that are common, though.  Fluorescence is usually
pretty linear, but it often has a substantial time constant, which
means that it departs from instantaneous linearity.  Optically-pumped
lasers, however, are a sort of nonlinear fluorescence phenomenon: you
don’t get a laser beam at all until the gain of the lasing medium
rises past 1, as limited by the Q of your cavity.  And the most common
kind of green laser isn’t a green laser at all; it’s an infrared laser
with a frequency-doubling crystal on the front of it, and that’s a
nonlinear phenomenon — it doesn’t start happening until the light
intensity is above a certain level.

Other nonlinear optical phenomena include phase-conjugating mirrors,
Kerr cells, the self-focusing of intense laser beams, and soliton
transmission, which is a sort of temporal analogue of spatial
self-focusing.  Any dielectric inevitably behaves nonlinearly to light
passing through it, since its overunity refractive index is due to its
response to the electric field of light being different from the
response of the vacuum, and that’s an effect that inevitably reaches a
limit at some field strength.  Normally, though, light’s electric
field is far too weak for us to notice this nonlinearity.

But, in the geometrical optics approximation, we invariably ignore
these nonlinearities, because they are tiny in everyday life.  So our
transfer function is, in effect, transferring every separate light
beam that could enter our apparatus into some distribution of light at
the output.  So our transformation function can be computed from a
sort of point spread function of the form ℝ⁴ → (ℝ⁴ → ℝ).

However, the requirement that the function be *reversible* means that
as the input light beam shrinks toward a perfectly collimated beam
entering at a single point†, the output light beam must *also* shrink
toward being such a thing, except perhaps at discontinuities.  So it’s
actually even simpler, and this is a simple case of a more general
principle called “conservation of étendue”.

XXX is this really correct?

† For wave-mechanical reasons you can’t actually make a perfectly
collimated beam entering at a single point — there’s a diffraction
limit on the divergence — but here we’re talking about properties of
the geometric-optics approximation.

Conservation of étendue
-----------------------

Étendue is a quantity that 

Translation-invariance
----------------------

Electroforming and Electropolishing
-----------------------------------

Electric current passes through a battery electrolyte not as free
electrons, as in a metal, but as positive metal ions, and this is true
whether you’re charging or discharging the battery.  The positive ions
are formed from the metal at the surface of the positive electrode,
which has electrons running away from it down a wire, through a
circuit, and back around to the negative electrode, where they travel
to the surface of the metal and neutralize arriving positive ions,
thus transmuting them back into insoluble metal.

You can use this process to coat some random conductive thing with a
layer of metal, which is called galvanizing or electroplating — or
electroforming, if you do it long enough — or to remove a thin layer
from the surface of a piece of metal, which is called
electropolishing, or cathodic corrosion if you do it by accident, like
on a metal ship hull.

Because electric fields are strongest around edges and sharp points,
electropolishing tends to remove those, leaving a mirror-like finish
on initially rough metal.  Also, since it doesn't 

At the currents typically used, this process typically deposits around
a nanometer per second of metal on one electrode and removes around a
nanometer per second from the other.  Much lower or higher currents
don’t work as well.

Fresnel electropolishing
------------------------

Holographic electropolishing
----------------------------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/View_factor
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrange_invariant
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etendue
