I was thinking about diode logic (see file `diode-logic`) and I
realized that I really need a curve tracer in order to theorize sanely
about diodes and whatnot.  But an off-the-shelf curve tracer is
pricey.

You could generate carefully controlled ramps using PWM and filtering,
but you don’t need to; if you’re willing to take the voltages that
show up, you can just measure voltages at different points in a test
circuit and see what happens.  A simple test circuit would have a
capacitor, an inductor, a resistor, and the device under test, in that
order, and you’d apply voltages (5V or 0V) at the ends of the circuit
and measure the voltages at the two ends of the resistor.

The idea is that the capacitor and inductor and so on turn your
step-function voltage changes into a smoothly changing voltage, so you
can see what the DUT does at a bunch of different voltages.  The
inductor also serves to limit current, as well as permitting variation
of dV/dt at a given voltage, and the capacitor serves to limit the
total charge you can put through the device, thus the energy
dissipated, thus the damage done.  The resistor also limits the
current and additionally provides a way to measure currents.

An Arduino’s built-in ADC can sample at 200 ksps, and you probably
only really need 1000 samples to draw an adequate curve, which ends up
being about 10ms if you’re sampling two separate points.  If you’d
like this to be a single ramp, you probably want the resonant
frequency 1/(2π√(LC)) to have less than a single cycle in 10ms,
i.e. to be less than 250Hz, but it’s probably okay for it to be three
or four or even ten cycles.  And the resistor will probably slow it
down further.

The ADC is most accurate when measuring against the 1.1 V bandgap
reference, but of course we will potentially have voltages to the 5V
rail and beyond — if the DUT is a piece of wire, then the voltage at
that end of the resistor will be 5V all the time.  So we should
probably use the 5V reference and merely calibrate it against the
bandgap reference periodically.

If we figure on currents up to about 2 mA, then a 2.2 kΩ resistor
would scale those currents to be within the same 0–5V range.  If we
use a much smaller resistor, we start losing precision on the current
measurements.  Then if we want our RC time constant to be around, say,
2ms, then we need something like a 1 μF capacitor.  Then, if we want
2π√(LC) to be something like 1ms, we need a honking 22 millihenry
inductor.  Maybe a better balance is to use a 1 kΩ resistor, a 3.3 μF
capacitor, and a 4.7 mH inductor.

ω₀ = 8000 radians/sec, Q = ω₀L/R ≈ 0.04.  This suggests that with such
low inductance this is going to behave basically like an RC circuit.
You don’t even get ringing until Q = 0.5, I think.  So to get the
potential benefits of inductance here, you really would need a bigger
inductor, which is surprising to me, since I think of millihenries as
largish.

The maximum energy stored in the capacitor at 5 V is 41 μJ, which
seems comfortingly small.  The 100-pF 1.5 kΩ Human Body Model reaches
that energy level at only 900 volts, so hopefully any device that is
ESD-rated should be able to handle this without breaking down.  Maybe
even back-biased tantalum capacitors.  This should be gentler than the
HBM, because its initial current spike into a 1.5 kΩ load is 300 mA
and 135 watts, while this circuit should be closer to 5 mA and 25 mW,
or maybe twice that.

I wish I could use a smaller resistor, too, because I’d like to trace
curves well beyond 5 mA.

So, next iteration of design: 220 Ω resistor, 1 μF capacitor, 47 mH
inductor, resonant frequency 734 Hz, ω₀ = 4600 radians/sec, Q = 1.0,
maximum current should be in the ballpark of 20 mA (the maximum on the
datasheet for an AVR pin), 12 μJ in the capacitor when charged to 5 V,
but we should be able to get a bit of overshoot from Q = 1.0; RC =
220 μs, which is about 44 samples from the ADC, so we probably have to
do a few cycles to get good coverage of the curve.

If we were naughty we could perhaps get rather higher voltages out of
the inductor by switching the pin on the other end of the DUT from its
low-impedance “output” state to a high-impedance “input, no pullup”
state.

With a low-impedance DUT, when voltage is initially applied, all of it
will be across the inductor.  This will result in a dI/dt of 5 V /
47 mH = 106 A/s or 106 μA/μs.  Every 10 microseconds we will take a
sample of voltage and a sample of current, with the current ramping up
about 1.06 mA per sample at first, which works out to 230 mV across
the resistor (about 48 counts out of 1024).  This seems like it will
give poor coverage of the originally planned 0–2 mA range, but we
could use a short pulse to start a current through the inductor, then
turn the output back off to allow the inductor current to decay under
the influence of the DUT, the resistor, and the capacitor.  If the
current is at 5 mA, the capacitor is empty, and the DUT is low
impedance, then the sense resistor will oppose with 1.1 V, which will
cause the inductor current to decay more slowly at 23 A/s (23 μA/μs,
0.23 mA per sampling interval).

Also, though, for many kinds of DUTs, we should have plenty of time at
low currents when the capacitor is almost charged.

I hacked together a shitty simulation (using difference equations to
approximate the differential equations, with a timestep of 200 ns) and
observe the following:

- The capacitor voltage overshoots the 5V rail by almost exactly a
  diode drop, 5.79 volts.  In a sense that’s about the best we can
  hope for — it’ll start to hit the AVR’s input-clamping action there.
- The simulation sees the current continuing to ring down for 9 full
  oscillations before it dies from roundoff error, but only the first
  two full oscillations are above 5 mV, which is one count on the
  AVR’s ADC when it’s using 5V as the reference.  Also they are
  negative half the time, although they never reach a full diode drop
  below ground.
- Those 9 full oscillations reach about 15 ms, which would be about
  600 Hz, suggesting that either my simulation is crappy or my
  calculation of the resonant frequency is not a good way to calculate
  the intervals between zero-crossings during ringdown.  Lowering the
  resistance to 47 Ω shortens that to about 12 ms, which would be
  about 820 Hz, which seems right.
- The peak current is a bit over 12 mA, which is better than 5 mA, but
  still leaves out a lot of interesting territory for many devices.

Slow devices — over a millisecond or two — may be hard to test in this
circuit.

(Discarded idea: how about if we use 220 Ω, 47 mH, but 4.7 μF?  This
eliminates the overshoot entirely (and thus presumably the possibility
of doing much interesting with the inductor) but does give us slower
ramps — we have like 6 ms of V_R being over 5 mV.  I didn’t expect
that adding more capacitance would make it stop ringing entirely, but
I guess it lowers the resonant frequency, and consequently Q if you
don’t change R and L.)

I tried driving this (simulated) circuit with a squarewave chirp and
got peaks of current up to 15 mA where the period was about 3.6 ms.
However, this also resulted in inductor voltages down to -6 volts.
Better make sure that inductor-capacitor point isn’t connected to an
AVR pin!  Worse, though, even the resistor voltage got down to about
-3 volts, and that point *does* have to be connected to a pin.  We can
perhaps raise the whole RLC circuit bodily to Vcc by raising the pins
at each end to 5V, thus allowing us to measure these reverse currents
and avoiding clamping.

(You do want to make sure you have pins connected separately on both
sides of the DUT and both sides of the capacitor, which amounts to
three of the four pins you need to make this work at all.  Otherwise
you have no way to discharge the capacitor in a reasonable amount of
time if the DUT is diodish.)
