Suppose you want a logic analyzer, and you have electronics, but you
don’t have a screen; you only have a speaker or headphone jack and
perhaps an LED or two.  What can you do?

It seems sensible to map the time domain to the time domain. (However,
you will often want about six orders of magnitude slowdown: a logic
analyzer needs to be measuring signals of at least 20 MHz, and the
humans can only hear signals up to about 20 Hz.  Then you can loop the
capture if desired.)  Then what do you map the different logic
channels to?

Probably the most sensible thing to do is to map them to different
pitches in the same octave, synthesizing those pitches with rich
harmonic content in order to make the perception of both pitch and
envelope more precise.  Emphasizing onsets with an attack-decay
envelope, or the variation in harmonic content that comes inevitably
from Karplus–Strong or other waveguide synthesis or that can easily be
produced with FM synthesis, might help with some kinds of debugging.

Unfortunately the choice of pitches has a tradeoff between
interpretability and aesthetic quality: dissonant pitches are easier
to distinguish, particularly if they happen to start and end
simultaneously, which will happen frequently on a logic analyzer.
Additional features that may help to distinguish the notes might
include different speeds, depths, and phases of vibrato, and the kind
of flanging effect produced by the beating of the harmonics of
nearly-equal-delay strings, as in a piano or a 12-string guitar.

(A counterintuitive feature of modern microcontrollers is that even
low-end microcontrollers are more than powerful enough to do real-time
multichannel Karplus–Strong synthesis with all-pass filters for
variable fractional-sample delays, and additionally they can do
digital logic analyzer data acquisition at megasamples per second.)

You probably need some way to configure a Boolean function to trigger
a capture.  Since you’re fiddling around with wires anyway in this
scenario, the simplest approach is to use jumper wires to hook up some
of the input lines to particular pins — some designated such that
their conjunction will trigger a capture, others designated such that
any of them will inhibit it.  This is not universal but might be
enough.  However, here in CMOS land, we need to hook those input pins
up to *something*; probably the best approach is to just enable
pullups or pulldowns and hope that doesn’t disturb the DUT too much.
