So it's kind of a pain to track my supermarket purchases, in part
because the receipt isn't really machine-readable.  The store often
has all the data in machine-readable form in their cash register;
could they give it to me in machine-readable form?

It's Technically Feasible, Inexpensively
----------------------------------------

The bare minimum information for the receipt would be a little bit of
header information (store location, date and time, currency of
transaction), and for each item on the receipt, a UPC code, a
quantity, and a price.  UPC codes seem to be 13 digits (abbreviatable
to 8), quantities are usually either three digits (of weight) or one
(of units), and prices are usually two to four digits, including
price.  You could prefix prices and quantities with a length digit or
terminated them with a non-digit code (say, if you're using BCD).
(Say you bought 2.30 kilograms of avocados for $12.40; the
quantity-and-price field would then read 323041240, and the UPC number
would have to indicate that the unit of measure was 10 grams).  In
this scheme, quantity 1 would be represented as "11"; you could
special-case that as "0".

So the typical item would have five digits of price and quantity data,
for a total of 18 self-delimiting decimal digits.  In BCD that would
be 72 bits, or 9 bytes.  The per-receipt header might be 30 bytes.  So
a 30-item receipt might be 300 bytes.  (In binary instead of BCD, you
would need about 60 bits per item, but that's probably not worth the
extra complexity.)

PDF-417 stacked barcodes hold up to 1108 bytes of binary data per
symbol; DataMatrix/Semacode holds up to 1556 bytes per symbol; QR Code
holds up to 2953 bytes per symbol (at 177x177 pixels, which is about
one-third redundancy).  So 300 bytes is small enough that you could
print a small barcode directly on the receipt, probably even with old
dot-matrix receipt printers, given appropriate driver software.

Minimally, with 1-bit pixels, you'd need 2400 pixels to represent 300
bytes, which is about 50x50 pixels.  In traditional 5x9 dot-matrix
fonts, that's less than 54 characters.  I don't know if existing
barcodes are sufficiently robust against the kinds of errors
dot-matrix printers add (round dots, row-to-row misregistration) but
there's plenty of headroom here for error correction.  I vaguely seem
to remember one of the matrix barcode systems recommending printing
each pixel of the barcode symbol with at least 4x4 of the underlying
pixels, so with that and the redundancy, you might need
16 * 4/3 * 300 * 8 = 51200 dot-matrix dots, 226 pixels square, or 1137
5x9 character cells.  By my count, my latest dot-matrix receipt is 34
characters wide, so that would be 33 lines.  On the face of it that
sounds like an impracticably large amount to add to a 30-item receipt,
but I've seen much worse, so it might already be reasonable.  But you
could presumably design a "barcode" whose overhead was close to a
factor of 1.33 instead of a factor of 21, and then you'd be down to 72
characters instead of 1137, which obviously adds only a trivial amount
of cost to the receipt.

So you could use a less obtuse data format, too, instead of the
horrible all-decimal format suggested above, where "323041240" means
"2.30kg $12.40".

How Could It Be Bootstrapped?
-----------------------------

It may seem a little impractical to expect supermarkets and the like
to upgrade their cash-register systems for the convenience of
customers who want to itemize all their grocery purchases, which is
something hardly any of them do.  But here's a slightly plausible
deployment path.

A few people, some of the time, have to itemize all their purchases
and turn in receipts: businessmen, academics, and NGO workers on
travel on expense accounts, mostly.  They already do this even though
it's a pain, and a lot of them do it when they're on travel without
their secretaries.  A lot of them would be delighted to avoid the
hassle.

So if a major retailer of some expense-account-able commodity
announced this kind of barcoded-receipt program and shipped free
software to import your receipts into a few of the most popular ways
of tracking expense accounts, it would attract these travelers.  Maybe
Ruth's Chris, or Avis, or Hyatt, or toward the lower end of the
market, maybe T.G.I.Friday's, Chili's, Days Inn, and the like.

It would have to offer some substantial advantage over monthly
credit-card bills to get adopted, since that's what a lot of these
folks use now.  I have a couple of ideas:
- It costs the receipt issuer much less to print a barcoded receipt
  than to process a credit-card transaction, so small-transaction
  merchants who aren't willing to accept credit cards could therefore
  become expense-account options.
- Issuing a company credit card to someone puts the company at some
  financial risk, and perhaps for this reason, academics on travel and
  workers for small NGOs rarely use company credit cards.  Accepting
  barcoded receipt entries does not entail any extra risk to the
  company.
- Credit-card bills lose any convenience advantage when only part of a
  purchase is expensable.

Similarly, self-employed USians who deduct business expenses on their
federal tax returns are obligated to itemize those business expenses:
travel expenses, raw materials, equipment, and the like.  This
suggests a broader group of retailers: Home Depot, OfficeMax, CompUSA,
Best Buy, Kinko's, Ace Hardware, FedEx, Ikea, the Gap, Borders.

Once the receipt-importing software was out there, other companies
could compete for these customers by barcoding their receipts too, if
the software to do so is relatively easily available.

The path from Hyatt to Carrefour is pretty dubious, though.  So is
there anyone already in a position of routinely itemizing their
supermarket purchases? Maybe servants who go grocery shopping for
their masters?

Thanks
------

To Beatrice, for very helpful discussions on the subject.
