I recently watched a YouTube video by “GreatScott!” demonstrating a
bistable magnetic electromechanical 7-segment display; each segment is
a slot through which a moving part is visible, one part of which is
white, while another part is black.  There are 7 electromagnets on the
back of the display; by passing a pulse of current through them in one
direction or the other, a permanent magnet attached to this moving
part is given a kick big enough to swivel the part and change the
color of the segment.  The permanent magnet has two stable positions
in which it is attracted to a ferromagnetic core, so the display
remains stable without applied power.

The display is multiplexed with a per-digit common ground, so that,
for example, an 8-digit display with 56 segments requires only 15
wires — but 7 of them need to be bipolarity.

Digital electromechanical decoding
----------------------------------

It occurred to me that in some sense this was excessive; 7 bipolarity
signals (with distinct +, -, and 0 states) can encode 3⁷ = 2187
commands rather than the 14 needed to switch 7 segments or even the
112 needed to switch 56 segments.  7 *unipolarity* signals are enough
to encode 128 commands, enough to switch 64 segments on or off.
Moreover it should be feasible to route the magnetic flux in such a
way that the decoding is done passively, by the magnets.

The crucial tricks are:

- You can route magnetic flux to an area by providing a low-reluctance
  path from a coil to that area; for example, a sheet of electrical
  steel, or more prosaically, a mild steel wire.  (At kHz and higher
  frequencies, ferrites might be useful.)

- You can sum flux from different coils by terminating low-reluctance
  paths in the same area, but with enough of an air gap between them
  that there isn’t a low-reluctance path between the different coils.
  It’s sufficient that the flux they produce impinge on a magnet or
  magnets attached to the same movable part.

- You can route magnetic flux from either end of a coil, so you can
  get both subtraction and addition.

- By including fixed permanent magnets in the mix, you can include a
  constant term in these sums.

This allows you to set the flux in a given area to an arbitrary affine
function of the currents in the different coils.  Consider an area you
want a movable permanent magnet to be attracted to only when the code
0001101 is present on the coil control wires.  You route the positive
ends of coils 0, 2, and 3 to that area, and the negative ends of coils
1, 4, 5, and 6, and include a fixed permanent magnet powerful enough
to counteract the flux from just over 2 coils, but not more.

In this area, if coils 0 and 2 only are energized, they are not
sufficient to overcome the fixed permanent magnet, and the movable
magnet continues to be repelled from the area.  If coil 1 is
additionally energized, it partially cancels the flux from coils 0 and
2, repelling the movable magnet even more strongly.  Now if coil 3 is
energized, we have 0, 2, and 3 fighting against 1 and the permanent
magnet, not quite enough to overcome it; but if coil 1 is then
de-energized, the balance flips, and the area becomes attractive
rather than repulsive.

In practice this probably means that one such “balance point” is
needed for each pixel — a position which can be made a stable
equilibrium with the right combination of energized coils, but becomes
an unstable equilibrium when power is removed — and once the movable
part has been brought to this balance point, one of two additional
coils is energized to tip the equilibrium in one direction or the
other, while the other coils are de-energized.

(Slightly tweaking this, instead of using two additional coils, you
could use one additional coil and a permanent magnet; this means that
the balance point is not quite an unstable equilibrium when power is
removed.)

So, simply by choosing the polarities with which each coil is coupled
to each pixel, we can make a unique combination of coil activations
the strongest for that pixel, then provide a permanent magnet strong
enough to cancel any combination other than that one.  In essence this
is an electromechanical McCulloch–Pitts neuron.

Stable, high-coercivity rare-earth or even ferrite permanent magnets
will work much better for this than unstable alnico magnets, because
one of the magnets needs to have a strength that stably discriminates
between the case where, say, 6 coils are activated in concert, and the
case where 7 are.

A trick not needed: by using different thicknesses of ferromagnetic
material, you can get different amounts of flux from the same amount
of electrical current.  This allows you to compute weighted sums and
differences.  However, though this trick is not needed, it is an
alternative to using varying strengths of fixed permanent magnets in
the different cells; it would allow them all to be the same strength.

PWM electromechanical decoding
------------------------------

A hard disk drive’s head is positioned with a voice-coil actuator by
running a precisely controlled current through a “voice coil”,
producing a precisely controlled magnetic field which moves the head
to a precisely controlled position within a few milliseconds.  Dynamic
speakers work on the same principle, moving the speaker cone to what
is in principle a precisely controlled position by producing a
precisely controlled magnetic field with a precisely controlled ac
voltage.  Class-D audio amplifiers generate that voltage by,
essentially, reactively low-pass filtering a PWM signal.

A very simple way of decoding PWM would put a floating magnetic
compass globe, like those people used to have on their car dashboards
in the 1980s, in an enclosure with a small transparent window through
which a single digit could be seen, out of ten printed on the globe in
different positions; a permanent magnet would align the globe to
display “0” in its equilibrium position, and a coil producing a field
at perhaps 120° from that of the permanent magnet could swivel the
globe to any desired position 1–9 by applying an appropriate strength
of field.  A second coil producing a vertical magnetic field could
provide a magnetic dip to counteract the globe’s tendency to return to
a default horizontal position; this could be used, for example, to
select from a larger repertoire of characters, or to engage mechanical
interlocks that kept the globe from turning when power was removed.

(For some reason, the traditional way of doing this, the galvanometer,
uses a mechanical hairspring rather than a permanent magnet to return
the needle to its zero position when power is removed.)

If you have some array of magnetically-responsive pixels — for
example, Dapper-Dan-style magnetic whiskers in tiny mostly-transparent
plastic boxes, parts of which are opaque white — you can use a similar
approach to scan a needle in a four-bar linkage involving two
galvanometers back and forth over this array of pixels, activating a
magnetic field at its tip to change the color of a pixel when
appropriate.  I think we can expect this to be slow and scale down
poorly, but it would work.

Tiny permanent magnets behind white paper, or better still boundaries
between magnetic poles behind white paper, could potentially make the
pixels bistable in the absence of friction — the black filings would
remain stably stuck to them in the absence of any applied magnetic
field, even in the face of slight vibrations, but could be persuaded
to leap to a different attractive spot by a temporary cancellation of
the magnetic field with the needle tip.

An advantage of using magnetic-pole boundaries is that the field
projected from the magnetic tip wouldn’t have to be perfectly
calibrated — any amplitude large enough to temporarily more than
cancel one of the poles would cause all the pole boundaries around
that pole to temporarily disappear, encouraging the filings to migrate
to a different still-existing boundary between poles.  By alternating
the field a number of times, filings in the area could perhaps be
vibrated loose from any frictional moorings that prevent them from
vacating the area.

Even without any PWM signals, scanning one or more needle tips over a
two-dimensional area could be effected by purely mechanical means, for
example in a VCR-like helical pattern, or a Spirograph-like family of
circles of the same radius rotated around a center, or a Lissajous
pattern created by two elastic resonant modes of different
frequencies.  Then, a persistent image could be produced simply from a
time-varying magnetic field at the needle tip.

Non-magnetic equivalents using electrets
----------------------------------------

Suppose that instead of magnetic fields we use electric fields, and
instead of permanent magnets we use electrets, which have the
potential advantage of being monopole-capable.  (As far as we know,
magnetism is not monopole-capable, but all the electrical particles we
know of are electrical “monopoles”, and so too are chunks of charged
electret.)  As described in file `paper-foil-relays`, this should
scale down rather well.  This is more or less how e-ink displays work,
but without the in-display decoding.

To be concrete about one possible realization, suppose we have some
negatively-charged black electret particles suspended in oil in a tiny
linear capsule; one end of the capsule is transparent, while the other
end is opaque.  We have some more negatively-charged electret embedded
in the wall of the capsule near its center, slightly toward the opaque
end, so the particles tend to drift toward the ends of the capsule
when no voltage is applied, and in particular if they start out
precisely in the center, they will tend to drift toward the
transparent end, making the capsule look black.  Lines 0, 2, and 3 are
connected through capacitors to electrodes wrapped around places near
the center of the capsule, but not overlapping, so that their mutual
capacitance is low.  Lines 1, 4, and 5 are connected through somewhat
larger capacitors to electrodes at each end of the capsule, and line 6
is connected through a capacitor to an electrode on the opaque end of
the capsule.

If +5V is applied to all of lines 0, 2, and 3, this pushes a certain
amount of charge through the capacitors onto the electrodes around the
center of the capsule, calibrated to be sufficient to shift the
equilibrium such that the suspended electret particles will tend to
drift from the ends to the center of the capsule.  If only two of
these lines are energized, this will not push enough charge onto those
electrodes to cancel the wall-embedded electret.  If all three of them
are energized, but also one or more of lines 1, 4, and 5, there will
be a net positive charge in the center of the capsule, but a larger
net positive charge at the ends, so electret particles will remain at
whichever end they are.  But if none of these inhibitory lines are
energized, the particles will move to the center, or rather, into a
cloud near the center but slightly toward the transparent end.

If lines 0, 2, and 3 are then grounded, the wall-embedded electret
will repel the cloud back to the transparent end.  But if first line 6
is brought high, it will move the cloud past the wall-embedded
electret, and then when lines 0, 2, and 3 are grounded, the cloud will
migrate to the opaque end instead.

Of course, the same seven lines can control 63 such capsule pixels in
this way, with lines 0–5 varying between inhibitory and activatory
roles on different pixels, and line 6 always controlling which way the
equilibrium falls when the decoding lines are released.  Different
capsules may require different amounts of wall-embedded electret to
cancel their varying numbers of activatory lines, or perhaps the
series capacitances that set the charge could instead be varied.

This is substantially more complex than the current schemes of e-ink
displays, and it requires fairly high precision of manufacture to
precisely calibrate the varying amounts of electret in each capsule,
as well as precision of design to distribute the electrical fields
properly.

Non-magnetic equivalents using other kinds of actuators
-------------------------------------------------------

We can easily go rather far afield with these ideas.

A scanning needle tip (whether raster, Spirograph, Lissajous, or
otherwise controlled) of course can be activated in other ways.  For
example, mechanical actuation — in machining this is called a
dot-peening machine and is used for alphanumeric part marking of
malleable surfaces, and I’ve used a handheld “Vibro-Graver” version of
the same process to mark my hand tools.  In an electrolyte, voltage on
a scanning needle tip can produce an image on a surface by selective
electroplating or electrochemical machining (depending on polarity),
and in air it can produce a corona discharge, which can selectively
functionalize passivated surfaces (see file `cold-plasma-oxidation`)
or produce light.  If scanned over the same surface in an electrolyte
for a long period of time, it can be used to 3-D print by
electrodeposition or to cut an almost arbitrary cavity by
electrochemical machining.  On a few metals, like silver, such
electrolytic processes can be used to induce a reversible, localized,
dramatic color change; as mentioned in file
`tio2-iridescent-printing`, anodizing of titanium can produce quite
brilliant colors through iridescence, and this can be done selectively
to produce color images.

Some of the summing-and-differencing approaches discussed above might
be usable to select individual “pixels” in such processes as an
alternative to moving a needle around; for example, anodic dissolution
of a metal workpiece will happen only in areas where there’s a *net*
current of positively-charged cations from the workpiece to the tool
pixels, while it’s possible to prevent anodic dissolution of tool
pixels by making them out of carbon, and electroplating of the tool
pixels with a suitable electrolyte.  So if all but one of the tool
pixels have a positive current flowing from them to the workpiece
because of summing negative and positive currents, it should be
possible to do selective electrochemical machining at the one pixel
that is sucking up cations instead.

Relays
------

Most of the above methods can be adapted to activate electrical
switches rather than optical pixels.
