(An edited version of [a comment I left on the orange
website](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=19194676).)

Someone asked: what are the uses of Bitcoin, other than sidestepping
the law?

Rather than sidestepping the law, you can be sidestepping official
corruption or crime.  There are lots of cases where people who are
supposed to be enforcing the law instead use their law-enforcement
powers for their own benefit, sometimes in ways that are illegal,
officially speaking, but in an unenforced way.

It’s perfectly legal for me to, for example, donate money to
WikiLeaks.  But Visa and Mastercard aggressively canceled every
merchant account that allowed people to use Visa or Mastercard to
donate to WikiLeaks, apparently because of secret pressure from US
government officials who were unhappy about some of the things that
WikiLeaks revealed.  The Snowden revelations — which may not have been
legal, so they are peripheral to the question — very likely wouldn’t
have happened without WikiLeaks being able to support him, which they
could only do because they could receive Bitcoin.

Similarly, many Patreon accounts are getting canceled because their
owners have published things that are embarrassing to Patreon, but not
illegal (typically, racist remarks).  If Bitcoin becomes mainstream,
there won’t be a centralized authority like Patreon that is in a
position to end people’s livelihoods because they publish politically
undesirable viewpoints.  (Right now, those viewpoints are viewpoints
that are odious to you, but there’s no guarantee that that will be the
case in the future; it’s easy to imagine Patreon bending to Chinese
government pressure to censor people who talk about Falun Dafa
persecution or Tiananmen Square, for example, even in countries where
that is legal.)

As another example, many Venezuelans are having difficulty fleeing the
country, even though fleeing the country is technically legal, due to
both official corruption and armed gangs.  You can get long-distance
bus tickets, but even if the bus can get fuel, it may be robbed in
transit by armed gangs (“*piratas del asfalto*”, as we call them here
in Argentina), who can take your cash and your cellphone but not your
LocalBitcoins password or your wallet seed.  You could argue that it’s
not clear what is and isn’t legal in Venezuela right now because there
are two competing governments, but neither of those governments
authorizes demanding bribes from would-be émigrés.

As yet another example, it’s perfectly legal in Iran and France for
French companies to do business with Iranian companies.  But, because
much of the world financial system is controlled by the US, it can be
difficult in practice; see [the Washington Post article on European
companies that are selling to
Iran](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/europe-says-it-will-stick-with-the-iran-deal-defying-a-us-demand/2019/02/15/032923ee-2fac-11e9-8781-763619f12cb4_story.html)
for more details.  Regardless of whether US law is misguided or not,
under well-established principles of international law dating back to
the Peace of Westphalia, it certainly does not apply to French
companies doing business in France with Iranian companies in Iran.

Also, in many countries, saving money in the local currency is a
recipe for poverty, but buying foreign currency is illegal.  [In 2016,
India invalidated most of its circulating currency without
warning,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Indian_banknote_demonetisation)
so that people would have to save their money in banks instead of in
their mattresses; this change significantly exacerbated India’s
poverty problem.  Here in Argentina, the peso lost over half of its
value last year.  Even the US dollar inflates by a few percent per
year, and it’s lost 96% of its value since Bretton Woods ended in
1972.  Like gold, Bitcoin’s volatility makes it suboptimal as a
savings vehicle (unless you like to gamble), but for many purposes its
disadvantages are less serious than those of the alternatives.

So, in a sense, I think you’re right that the main purpose of
cryptocurrencies is to sidestep *violent coercion*.  I think you’re
terribly naïve about how much illegal violent coercion is actually
“the law”, although that’s understandable if you’ve never lived
outside a rich country.  Increasingly, the same kinds of problems are
occurring in rich countries as well, so you may have a chance to
correct your naïveté with experience.  Hopefully you’ll have some
Bitcoin first.

There are other uses as well; it’s a dramatically better way to send
money overseas, for example.  Last time someone sent me money via
Western Union, I had to go to three different locations, stand in line
for twenty minutes, hand over a massive amount of personal information
(perfectly suited for identity fraud or targeted home robbery) to an
unaccountable third party, sign a false statement, and walk out the
door into a dangerous neighborhood with a pocket full of small bills.
For this “service”, WU charged me/them about 10% of the money sent,
and also didn’t inform me when it arrived.  Bitcoin transactions
require none of this nonsense and cost much less; the last Bitcoin
payment I received from overseas cost 0.3%, and I received a
notification in a few minutes in my Bitcoin client of the transaction.

(See also file `fractional-reserve-banking` for how Bitcoin and
similar systems could potentially provide many of the financial
functions of the current banking system with much lower risk, both
individual and systemic.)

Many thanks to sbp for his comments, which greatly improved this note!