Suppose you're washing out a bottle.  You want to achieve the maximum
dilution of the contaminants in the bottle for a given amount of
water; a miser might phrase this as minimizing the amount of water
needed to get the needed dilution of the contaminants.

If we abstract a little, we're repeating this process some number of
times:

1. dumping all the water out of the bottle except for the little bit
   that won't come loose, which contains all the remaining
   contaminants; call that remaining water volume V0;

2. adding more water to dilute the water already in the bottle, up to
   some volume V1, diluting the contaminants by a factor V1/V0 by
   using an amount of water V1-V0, which we will then dump out when
   we repeat step 1.

After cycling some quantity V2 of water through this process, we've
repeated it V2/(V1-V0) times, more or less, and achieved a dilution of
(V1/V0)^(V2/(V1-V0)) times.

You might think that you don't want to go to extremes here.  If V0 is
one milliliter, and V1 is two milliliters, then on each cycle, you
reduce the contamination by a factor of 3; so if you use twenty
milliliters, you've reduced it by 3¹⁰, almost sixty thousand.  By
contrast, if you dump all twenty milliliters in at once, you achieve
only a dilution of 1/21, which is pathetic; and if you go toward the
other extreme and use one microliter of water on each rinse cycle, you
go through twenty thousand rinse cycles, each providing a 1001/1000
dilution, which you might think wouldn't make much difference.  But it
turns out that that adds up to a dilution factor of 480 340 920 times.
(You need the first thousand rinse cycles just to get to a dilution of
roughly e, 2.717, but every thousand rinse cycles then adds up to
another factor of e, and e²⁰ is almost five hundred million.)

That's about as good as you can do, though: rinsing with 20 times the
amount of residual water that you can't get out will give you a
dilution of up to e²⁰.  And you can reach almost that optimum, three
hundred million, say, with only 400 rinses, each of 50 microliters.
At only 20 times the residual water, you don't get much additional
benefit from reducing the amount of water on each rinse cycle below a
twentieth or so of the residual water.  However, because it's an
exponential process, small differences in dilution will grow into
larger ones as you repeat the process.

Which is to say that, perhaps unsurprisingly, a more or less
continuous rinse is the ideal; you want to remove rinse water as fast
as it's added.  Allowing any amount of rinse water to accumulate
that's significant compared to the residual, unremovable water will
dramatically reduce the dilution you achieve.  Once your effective
number of rinses drops to 50, in the scenario above, you've lost more
than an order of magnitude of dilution over 20 rinses.

Of course, if you have a way to reduce the residual water, that will
be even more effective.  Reducing the residual water is equivalent to
increasing the rinse water by the same factor, which increases the
exponent on e; in the above example, reducing the residual water by 50
microliters pumps up the optimum from e²⁰ to e²¹ (plus a bit),
improving your final dilution by a factor of 2.7!

(This exponential sensitivity of the final result to the precise
dilution ratio suggests use for sensitive measuring equipment.  If you
have a 1%-precision measure of the final concentration, say, you can
derive an 0.05%-precision measure of the geometric-mean ratio of the
ratio of the residual and rinse water in each step, or more if you
repeat the dilution procedure more times.)

On the other hand, since it's an exponential process, the absolute
magnitude of the problem is not so terrible.

The ideal is to achieve dilutions in the mole range (10²⁴), such that
even if mole quantities of the contaminants were originally present,
no molecules of them remain afterwards.  (Succussion has not been
shown to help.)  The minimum to reach a dilution of 10²⁴, with the e²⁰
limit above, is when 20 ≈ 55.3; that is, you need 55.3 times as much
rinse water as the residual water.  If for some reason you're stuck in
a low-efficiency regime where you can't avoid rinse-water
accumulation, such that each rinse cycle only dilutes contaminants by
a factor of 2, you need 80 rinse cycles, which means you need 80 times
as much rinse water as residual water.  At 55 rinse cycles, you will
have only reached a dilution of about 3 × 10¹⁶, thirty million times
more concentrated than with the optimal strategy.

That is, in more or less the worst case, your non-optimal rinsing
strategy costs you only about 45% more water, even though when using
the same amount of water, it's thirty million times worse.

(It's kind of amazing that it's feasible to achieve such extreme
dilutions at all, let alone achieve them in your kitchen.  Of course,
there are always tricky details to get right, like that congealed
grease spot full of PCBs that isn't getting diluted by your water.
Don't get cocky.)

If your desire is not to remove every single molecule of whatever
contaminants you have, but simply to reduce the pH of your laundry to
the point where it won't deteriorate while drying or in storage due to
the alkali, you have a much easier task.  I'm going to guess that the
pH of alkali laundry systems rarely goes above 10 and almost never
goes above 11, and that reducing the pH to 8 before drying the laundry
will provide adequate protection; that's a dilution of only 10³, which
you can achieve with 10 rinse cycles in what I described as "more or
less the worst case" and 7 "rinse cycles" in the best case of
continuous mixing.

Welp, guess it's time to rinse this laundry.
