I've been putting dry bulk foods into used Coke bottles for storage.
The place where I'm staying for another week now has bottles of
soybeans, polenta, flaxseeds, whole wheat flour, white flour, rice,
and lentils.  This makes me happy.  I feel like I'm creating order out
of chaos.  The bottles look a lot prettier than half-full bags of
lentils, and they also exclude cockroaches and beetles better.
(Sometimes beetles can get into even sealed-shut plastic bags.)  They
also seal hermetically, preventing oxygen and moisture from the air
from attacking the contents, and for foods that come in paper bags
rather than plastic, there's the additional advantage that they
protect the food from possible roof leakage --- not a merely
theoretical advantage in the places where I've been living!

One of the bottles I have to work with is not a Coke bottle, but a
bottle for Terma, a sort of bittersweet herbal infusion that's popular
here.  The plastic is green, so a lot of foods look horrible inside of
it, despite its graceful form, which looks rather like a thigh
modified to be rotationally symmetric.  So rather than using it for
storage, I scissored off the top of the Terma bottle to use it as a
funnel for filling the other bottles with, then heated up the neck
with a stove flame in order to squish it down a bit so it fits inside
other bottle necks --- not actually necessary since it's not a big
deal if I spill a few drops of flour or a lentil or two, but helpful.

(Another Terma bottle got used for yerba mate instead, which looks
fine when tinted green.)

Washing the bottles out is kind of a pain because they don't dry
easily.  I've taken to dripping a few drops of 96% ethyl alcohol into
them and shaking it around to take up the water.  Then I can just pour
it out, because it has a lot less surface tension than water.  Also,
it's reassuring that it's a mild disinfectant.

The more time-consuming step --- which I'm not doing this time around
--- is removing the glue that keeps the labels on.  Terma labels come
off with just water, leaving only a little residue, but Coke and Pepsi
label glue (at least currently in Argentina) won't come off even with
alcohol; turpentine works, but also penetrates the bottle and can
leave the food tasting like turpentine.  Filling the bottles with cold
water before turpentining the labels off reduces this problem.

A friend suggested freezing foods like flour for a while before
storing them, in order to kill any beetles that might be hiding in
them, which seems like an eminently sound idea to me.  After all, even
if the bottles keep the beetles or moths contained, you still lose a
bottlefull of food, which could have been avoided if you just had to
discard a single beetle.

In order to limit the lifetimes of foods stored this way, I label the
bottles with the name of the contents and the date it was bottled.  So
far I haven't found a good way to do this.  Masking tape is workable,
but the adhesive decays over time, and two years later when I use the
bottle for something else, I'm left with stinky dried adhesive on the
outside of the bottle.  Also, the masking tape itself is kind of ugly.
Permanent marker works, but you can't take it off, and I fear that the
solvent will flavor the food.  Maybe paper labels with some kind of
water-based adhesive, such as wheat paste, would be best, but first
I'm going to try tying bows around the necks of the bottles using a
wide cloth ribbon I write on.

Many people prefer glass bottles for this kind of thing because
they're prettier.  Plastic Coke bottles have three advantages over
glass bottles:

- If you knock them off the shelf, they don't break.  In fact, if you
  run over them with a truck, they don't break.  If you hit them with
  a baseball bat, they don't break.  They're nearly bulletproof.
- They weigh much less.
- For things like flour which can entrain air, you can squirt them out
  of the bottles like liquids by turning the bottle upside down and
  squeezing.
