My netbook broke the other day, which is why there's been a six-day
gap in Dercuano.  I suspect what went wrong is not actually the disk,
so the extra stuff I'd written that night and not yet pushed to GitLab
is probably recoverable, but it reminded me again of the precarious
and janky state of my informatic infrastructure.  I'm writing this on
a different netbook with a nearly-shot battery and a Wi-Fi chip that
keeps crashing.  I'm going to have to reboot it to push this.

Normal people are using Google Docs, Apple's iCloud, and things like
that more and more because of problems like this, despite the (to me)
obvious security problems.

Ideally I would have a unified namespace of my data, including
downloaded databases like this Wikipedia ZIM file and fairly ephemeral
data like browser and editor state, with a local cache of it (and
pending updates) on each user-interface device I have (netbooks,
desktops, hand computers, whatever).  Then each piece of data would
also be replicated to different storage devices, which might be
pendrives, file servers, or encrypted blobs in S3 buckets.  The
underlying model would be something like Secure Scuttlebutt mixed with
git-annex, but the user interface would hopefully be something a bit
easier to use.  Ideally the loss or breakage of a cellphone or netbook
would be only a minor inconvenience limited to whatever data had been
created on it since the last time it was synced with any surviving
device.

Downloading large databases over the internet is best left to a
Raspberry Pi server on an always-on internet connection, not my laptop
or hand computer.  Syncing the downloaded database onto my laptop over
The local connection, once I'm in its proximity in person, should be
fast and transparent.

As I said before, this extends to local app state, so ideally it
should be straightforward to, on my laptop, open up the "what my phone
is viewing" folder and then transfer the session state of whatever I
was doing on the phone onto the laptop --- and vice versa.
