I played Minetest a lot for a while (see file `minetest-addiction`)
and I’ve been thinking a lot about lego-like construction sets and
Minecraft voxels, in particular the voxels used for flowing water and
lava, which have varying heights.  More like real-world sand, Minetest
water or lava (and, I assume, Minecraft water and lava) has a certain
angle of repose; if you have a water source on top of an otherwise
flat surface, the water forms a very obtuse cone around it, out to a
certain maximum radius.  The water height within any given voxel is an
affine function of X and Y, and the water heights in adjacent voxels
are equal along their common edge, at least in equilibrium.  The
result is that you can get a smoothly sloping surface, with a crude
approximation of curvature, out of a finite number of distinct voxel
types.

This led me to thinking of 3-D printing and marching cubes or marching
tetrahedra.  If you wanted to print out cubical building blocks that
snapped to a voxel grid to do this kind of smoothly sloping
heightfield, you’d need to quantize the height at the points of the
X-Y lattice; the minimal number of heights would be 2, and this yields
five types of building blocks, with empty and full corners expressed
in the order (0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0), (1, 1, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 1, 1),
(1, 1, 1), (1, 0, 1), (0, 0, 1): FFFF FEEE, FFFF FFEE, FFFF FFFE, FFFF
FFFF, and EFFF FEFF.  Here a “full” corner has material inside the
cube touching the corner, though possibly only in some directions,
while an “empty” corner has no material around it, and indeed no
material anywhere nearby.  The intended shape is something like the
convex hull of the “full” points.

The fourth block is just a cube; there’s a sixth “block” EEEE EEEE
that is just empty space and thus doesn’t need to be printed.  FFFF
FEEE, FFFF FFEE, and FFFF FFFE are different kinds of ramped surfaces,
two with three √2 edges forming a slanted triangle, and one in the
middle with two √2 edges and two 1 edges forming a slanted rectangle,
all three with 1-1-√2 triangles on some vertical sides.  The final
block, EFFF FEFF, is missing two opposite corners, so all six of its
paraxial faces are right triangles; it’s a triangular antiprism, and
it isn’t needed for heightfields.  These five blocks can be rotated
and somehow stuck together at grid nodes to approximate any surface
mesh produced by marching cubes, rounded to the nearest grid node.

If we’re looking for maximal expressiveness with minimal inventory,
the many symmetries of the cube are helpful; four of these five blocks
are asymmetric and can be oriented in different ways to produce
different shapes.  (FEEE and FFFE have 8 meaningfully different
orientations, while FFEE has 12.  EFFF FEFF only has 3.)  This
rotational symmetry dramatically increases the expressiveness of this
five-block vocabulary.

Or so I thought.  But that’s only 1+8+8+12+3+1 = 33 total voxels that
can be formed, which is actually still short by a factor of 8 from the
256 I’d expect.  I realized I was missing FFFF FEFE, which can be
realized as a ridge, a valley, or a saddle, but in any case has 12
distinct rotations.  And EFFF FEFE, and some others.  I should
probably write a program to make a full inventory.

But this led me to the conclusion that perhaps, even though the cube’s
24 orientations mean that any individual block can be oriented in the
voxel structure in up to 24 different ways, its 8 vertices, which give
256 different possible voxels, are a difficulty.  Still, five blocks
(FEEE, FFEE, FEFE, FFFE, and FFFF) are sufficient for heightfields,
which are sufficient for arbitrary shapes that aren’t thinner than two
voxels.

Hill’s polyhedron, an irregular tetrahedron into six of which you can
slice a cube, is an immediately promising alternative polyhedron.  As
it’s a tetrahedron, removing any of its vertices leaves it empty, so
you don’t need a potentially large selection of them.  As a bonus, you
can assemble it into cubes and also a number of the pieces I described
having to print separately above.  I don’t think it covers all the
possible heightfields described above, though, because its faces are
1-1-√2 and 1-√2-√3, so it doesn’t have the √2-√2-√2 equilateral
triangles that result from cutting off cube corners.

Another alternative for approximating marching-cube surface meshes is
to approximate just the surface, rather than voxels bounded by the
surface, using flat triangles connected at the edges.  1-1-√2
triangles are adequate for square faces and half-square faces;
√2-√2-√2 triangles provide the cut-off corners; and 1-√2-√3 triangles
provide the remaining cutting planes.

Other tilings of 3-space (“honeycombs”) may also offer good tradeoffs.
Although the close-packings of rhombic dodecahedra and cuboctahedra
aren’t particularly promising in themselves, the duals of these
packings packing consist of tetrahedra and octahedra.  With tetrahedra
and half-octahedra, you could build a version of these packings that
can be truncated at a wide variety of planes.

Octahedra have the same set of 24 rotations as cubes (it’s actually
called chiral octahedral symmetry; its point group is the symmetric
group S₄) while tetrahedra have 12 (A₄, the alternating subgroup of
the symmetric group S₄).  So an asymmetric octahedral piece could have
as many as 24 usefully different orientations, and an asymmetric
tetrahedral piece could have as many as 12.

I’m having a hard time visualizing the close-packings at the moment,
but I think each face in the octahedral-tetrahedral honeycomb is
shared between a tetrahedron and an octahedron.  If that’s the case, a
single asymmetric octahedron and eight asymmetric tetrahedra would
have 12⁸ = 430 million usefully distinct configurations; by the time
you have the six octahedra and eight tetrahedra necessary to surround
a point in space, the configuration space is unbelievably huge.

Stud patterns
-------------

Returning to a cubic honeycomb for the moment, two square faces can be
joined together in any of four orientations; if we want all such faces
to be compatible with all other faces, the simplest option is to make
them all identical.  But they must be symmetric under not only those
four rotations, but also some kind of half-turn around an axis in the
plane of the face to bring a face around to face another identical
face; that is, the three-dimensional contour of the face itself must
possess chiral octahedral symmetry.  It could, for example, possess
male organs at 1 o’clock, 4 o’clock, 7 o’clock, and 10 o’clock, and
corresponding female organs at 11 o’clock, 8 o’clock, 5 o’clock, and 2
o’clock.  Indeed, fully an eighth of the face could be devoted to each
such organ.  But how should these organs interlock?

*****

Thinking about legos (in particular, Lego-brand legos versus inferior
underdog knockoff legos like the “Loc Blocs” I had as a kid), I had an
epiphany: the very short insertion distance of Lego-brand studs is a
natural optimization result for such frictional connections.  The
strength of the two-piece assembly is proportional to the frictional
force (in one direction, it is precisely the frictional force), while
the energy to assemble or disassemble it is jointly proportional to
the frictional force and the insertion distance.  (In fact, it is
their product.)  The impact energy the two-piece assembly can
withstand without coming apart is also, in one direction, the energy
to assemble or disassemble it, so lower assembly energy means lower
impact resistance, but it need not mean lower strength.  That strength
can be arbitrarily high despite arbitrarily low assembly energies, at
least in the limit of arbitrarily rigid material shaped with
arbitrarily tight tolerances.  The Lego company’s tolerances are
around 2–10 microns.

Roughly approximating, Lego-brand studs are inserted to about half a
millimeter with about 5 newtons of force, so an 8-stud brick needs
about 20 millijoules to assemble or disassemble.

PLA
---

This is reassuring for the prospect of 3-D printing building blocks
using PLA, which is somewhat weaker and enormously more rigid than the
when assembled ABS used in Lego-brand legos, or even the shitty
polystyrene used in “Loc Bloc” brand legos.  The consequence is that
PLA has dramatically less impact resistance than ABS, and also can
store dramatically less elastic energy when pieces are snapped
together.

Typical RepRap-style FDM has curious precision characteristics: an
error of some 100 μm horizontally (in the X and Y directions) which
can sometimes be reduced to 50 μm or less, but typically a worst-case
error of 150 μm or more in the Z direction, due to quantization to
typically 300-μm layer height to avoid unreasonably long printing
times.  These impose a minimum scale on interference-fit parts which
depends on the geometry: the parts need to stretch or squish or bend
by at least the dimensional error when assembled in order to have any
contact at all in the dimensional-error worst case.  Ideally, they
need to deform by an amount that is large relative to the dimensional
error, so that the dimensional error won’t result in dramatic
variations in assembly/disassembly force (and assembly impact
resistance), as it does with many kinds of poorly made construction
sets.

I don’t remember what PLA’s elongation at break is, but let’s suppose
it’s around 1%, similar to steel’s yield strain.  (Nylon is around
30%, and ABS is substantially less.)  That means that a simple
mortise-and-tenon joint with a deformation of 300 μm needs to be at
least 30 mm wide in the deformed dimension!  A simple mortise and
tenon is not far from the geometry certain Lego-brand legos use, in
particular the one-unit-thick plates.  Such a geometry will not work
with RepRap-printed PLA until you reach pieces 1000 times the volume
of Legos.

Prong clips
-----------

However, cantilever beams as used in many molded-plastic snap joints
should work.  1% elongation means that you can bend a
uniform-thickness strip of it in a circle of whose diameter the strip
thickness is 1%: 100 mm diameter if the strip is 1 mm thick, for
example, or 30 mm diameter if it’s 300 μm thick, or 10 mm diameter if
it’s 100 μm thick.  Cantilever beams get slightly better performance
than that using a linear taper to get a uniform stress distribution,
but it’s not too far; so a 300-μm-thick uniform-thickness PLA
cantilever beam can deflect by 300 μm without breaking if it is at
least 9.5 mm long.

This is objectionably long, but it need not protrude by 9.5 mm; it can
be recessed and zigzag as desired, in ways that are impractical in
molded parts, reminiscent of coil springs but potentially much more
sophisticated.

I don’t know PLA’s Young’s modulus, either, but an old snapshot of
Wikipedia gives polystyrene’s Young’s modulus as 3–3.5 GPa, which is
probably in the ballpark; the plastics feel about equally stiff,
although PLA is much more fragile.  This suggests that if that 9.5-mm
strip is 1 mm wide and 300 μm thick, bent into a circular arc with a
surface strain of 1% and thus an average strain of 0.5%, it’s under a
total force of about 4.5 N, half tension and half compression, working
over lever arms which vary proportionally with the stress and so
average about 100 μm; this means the force to deflect the beam by that
much is about 45 millinewtons.

Calculating this force in another way, the specific energy of (my
guesses about) PLA amounts to stretching it by 10 microns per
millimeter, requiring 30 MPa of stress; ½ 30 MPa 10 μm/mm = 0.15 J/mℓ,
so PLA can tensilely store 0.15 J/mℓ, or half that in the beam-bending
case, 0.075 J/mℓ.  This strip is 0.00285 mℓ, so that works out to 214
microjoules.  If that’s built up over a deflection of 300 μm, the
average force should be 713 millinewtons, with a peak force of 1.4
newtons.  So I biffed a calculation somewhere.

By sticking a hook on the end of such a clip, we can amplify this
force with an inclined plane, but probably only by a factor of two or
three — at some point the frictional force will get out of control and
the thing will just break instead of sliding in and out as desired.
(The hook does have the major advantage that you can make it easier to
assemble than to disassemble — same energy, but lower force.)  The
solution is probably to put many such thin strips in parallel like the
pages of a book.

Suppose you have a 3-mm-side square hole to work with.  You can have
two parallel prongs that fit into it, each tipped with a hook, each of
whose shafts consists of many 3-mm-wide, 300-μm-thick strips with
150-μm-wide spaces between them.  The shafts deform by 300 μm upon
insertion, coming into near contact (100 μm of space left in case the
fabrication comes out too thick) and snap back by 150 μm upon full
insertion.  This gives us 2.6 mm of space to divide among these
strips, meaning that there can be about 3 of them in each prong — 433
microns rather than the 450 described above, so only 283 microns of
thickness in each strip.  And these strips are being bent
S-curve-style rather than cantilever-style, since their ends are not
free to rotate relative to one another (unless we want to try for a
living hinge pivot, which seems inadvisable) so the prongs need to be
about 13 mm long, which could quite reasonably be half recessed
without even zigzagging.

The hook ramps can reasonably give a 2:1 mechanical advantage for
insertion (600 microns deep for 300 of deflection) and a 1:2
mechanical disadvantage for removal (75 microns deep for 150 of
deflection), so that the removal force is four times the insertion
force, plus friction.  Most of the 3-mm-wide hole can be oversized so
as not to contact the hooks until they are almost at depth, so only
the last 675 microns of movement have friction.  The prong tips are
3 mm (almost) by 1.3 mm, so they are quite robust relative to the
300-micron-tall hook on their side.

Better than prong clips
-----------------------

But there’s no reason to put the springs outside the building blocks
in long prongs like that where they’re vulnerable to breakage.  Nearly
the entire volume of the building block can be devoted to spring
flexures that permit hooked studs on the outside to move or help
capture inserted studs.

But you only have a sixth of the block to devote to the springs for
each face, assuming you have connectors on all six faces.  (It might
be better to default to connectors on three or four faces for most
projects, both in order to ease assembly and in order to ease
printing; passive recesses can frictionlessly accommodate excess male
stud prongs).  If you want to be on the order of the Lego-brand
assembly energy per face, which I estimated above at 20 millijoules,
the one-sixth of the block devoted to that face needs to contain 0.27
mℓ, so the block as a whole needs to contain some 1.6 mℓ of PLA.  If
it needs to be 25% empty space, it needs to occupy at least 2.13 mℓ.
Probably it’s best to use a large safety factor and allocate, say,
8 mℓ per cube, which is precisely 20 mm on a side.  This is
significantly coarser than Lego-brand resolution, but not outrageously
so; far better than we have any right to expect, actually, given the
outrageously inferior qualities of PLA for this sort of thing.

Maybe the studs (or stud parts, since they ought to have opposing
motion in order to grip locally rather than globally) should have
motion that isn’t purely parallel to the surface of the block, so the
inclined-plane effect is larger than you'd expect from the shape of
the hooks.

