Suppose you’re waiting for the bus on a Sunday.  You know that the bus
goes where you want to go, and it will get you there in five minutes.
But you may not be sure when or how often the bus runs on Sundays.
You can walk where you want to go, but it will take you 50 minutes.
At some point, if the bus hasn’t come yet, you’ll give up and start
walking.  You would like to arrive as soon as possible.  How long is
it optimal to wait before you start walking?

(To simplify the problem I’m ignoring many complexities of the
real-world situation; for example, you might get lost walking, or fall
off a bridge and die; or, if the bus comes while you’re walking, you
might be able to run back to the bus stop, or to the next bus stop; or
the bus might catch on fire while you’re on it, or take a detour that
takes you further from your desired destination; you might be
hallucinating the destination, or waiting at the wrong bus stop, or
indeed be an Alzheimer’s patient in a nursing home whose belief in
both the bus and the destination is a demented delusion; you may be
dreaming, and thus able to cause the bus to arrive whenever you want;
and so on.)

This problem depends on two parameters: one is your prior probability
distribution of bus arrival times, and the other is your utility
function over destination arrival time distributions.  There are some
simple cases that are easy to solve.  For example, if your probability
distribution is just a Dirac delta at some time t₀, which is to say
that you know for certain when the bus will arrive, then you should
wait if t₀ < 45 minutes, walk immediately if t₀ > 45 minutes, and do
as you like if t₀ = 45 minutes.  If you absolutely need to arrive
within 51 minutes, perhaps for a court date to appeal your upcoming
execution, you should walk if there is any possibility of the bus
taking longer than 45 minutes to arrive.  (Of course, in reality,
there is always some possibility of that.)

One solution which is robust (that is to say, it’s not optimal, but
the optimal solution can only beat it by some reasonably small margin)
over wide ranges of these parameters is to wait 45 minutes.  This
bounds your destination arrival time to 95 minutes, which is less than
a factor of 2 worse than the best result you can guarantee (if you
just start walking immediately), and it has a "regret property" that
is also bounded to a factor of less than 2: if you arrive at 95
minutes, the soonest you could have arrived if you’d waited longer
would have been 50 minutes, which is better by less than a factor of
2.  I want to make some kind of argument based on Lipschitz constants
of utility functions here, but I’m not certain how to formulate it
yet.

This problem is closely analogous to a wide range of planning problems
in domains with large variance.

For example, suppose you want to write a video-codec subroutine for
60-frame-per-second video, and you are trying to choose whether to
write it in C or Python.  You know that you can write it in C, and if
you write it in C, it will be plenty fast, but writing things in C
takes longer — say, 500 minutes.  You know you can write it in Python
in about 50 minutes, but you don’t know if it will be too slow to use.
(If it ever takes more than 16.7 milliseconds to run, it will make the
video playback skip frames.)  How long should you fiddle around with
trying to optimize the Python version to be fast enough before you
throw it away and write the C version?

In an analogous way, if you only have 500 minutes to solve the
problem, you should just “walk”, writing the C version to begin with.
But if you can afford to take a bit longer — say, 600 minutes — you
should try writing the Python version and see if you can get it to run
fast enough.  Maybe you’ll finish the task in 50 or 100 or 150 minutes
instead of 500 minutes.  But by trying that option, you’re taking the
risk that the overall task might extend to 550 or 600 or 650 minutes,
if the Python approach doesn’t work out.

This simplified model highlights one reason that it is so costly to
maximize the predictability of processes for, among other things,
writing software.  The fastest and highest-quality process is only
very rarely the most predictable one.

Schedule estimation errors are widely observed to be lognormally
distributed rather than normally distributed.  This is not the only
reason, but it is a significant one.
