(See also file `window-systems`.)

I was thinking a lot about RESTish ways of doing stuff with caches and
whatnot, and I was thinking that maybe you could do a desktop
environment consisting of background images, alpha blending, text,
text layout, windows, currying, and fonts, using redirects and caches.

The main idea is that, each frame (60 times a second), the window
system virtually sends many requests (see file `coap-thoughts`) to the
root window, one for each 16×16 pixel tile (see file
`caching-screen-contents`).  This works out to 120×68 tiles on my
1920×1080 screen, or 8160 requests, for a total of 490,000 requests
per second.  The root window largely sends back temporary redirects:
for subwindows they are redirects to requests for those subwindows,
for background images they are redirects to those background images,
and for text layouts they are redirects to those text layouts.  In
cases where more than one kind of thing participates in the tile, the
window sends out the requests and takes responsibility for compositing
them.

This is a rather large number of requests; 0MQ on my laptop with one
single-threaded PUSH process and one single-threaded PULL process can
only handle about 2.5 million (empty) messages per second.  But the
idea is that, almost all of the time, those messages aren’t being sent
at all; they’re satisfied from a local cache.

There isn’t a single unified cache, but rather a somewhat distributed
caching system, using an asynchronous cache invalidation protocol.
Each potentially cached request carries with it an identifier for the
cache invalidation endpoint; a stateless responder can merely forward
this identifier on to the resources it’s fetching to compute the
response, while a stateful one should generally store it for cache
invalidation purposes.

A window with text in it can query the text layout to find out where
to put the text (and which text is visible) and query the font to get
the individual glyphs to display, then compositing them onto the
background in the appropriate places.

The distributed nature of the caching system allows the display to
apply an outdated-is-okay policy of using cached window contents if it
hasn’t received an up-to-date response by frame render time, or
perhaps graying them out a bit or something, without globally applying
such an outdated-is-okay policy or having a switch in the protocol for
it or something, or having the cache first send an outdated response
and then the real response, or whatever.  Also, the display server can
use a specialized cache structure — for example, instead of caching
separate responses to the different tile requests, it can cache a
single screen bitmap and maintain a tile validity bitmap (of only 8160
bits), and maybe even use a specialized invalidation handling policy
of requesting tiles early.  Downsides include cache duplication (many
windows requesting the same glyph will cache it many times) and
inability to globally optimize cache usage to minimize CPU time or
improve responsiveness.

A cached redirected response can be invalidated because any of the
resources in the redirect chain was invalidated, including the final
response.  Using a redirect rather than just proxying the request
allows the (potentially large) response to avoid an extra copy, or
potentially many extra copies.

Currying a resource-with-arguments to be just like a normal resource
allows requests and cache keys to stay small.

The requests and responses can be pipelined between a relatively small
number of processes to amortize system call overhead over large
numbers of small messages.  Given potentially many outstanding
requests, it may be reasonable to process them (on a given core) in an
order determined by which piece of code is responsible for processing
them.

I don’t know, this seems like it might be a bit of mental masturbation
in the sense that we already have working ways to build window
systems.  The main problem they have is that the window systems (and
our operating systems) do a shitty job of guaranteeing responsivity to
the user, and probably the way to solve that problem has more to do
with avoiding swapping, prioritizing real-time interaction (like
providing feedback to clicks and typing) over background tasks (like
font rendering and relayouts), and having the whole user interface
written in a way that guarantees finite and deterministic memory usage
and CPU time — static allocation of memory and CPU time rather than
dynamic, really.  There are only so many pixels on the display, after
all, and on a 60Hz video card you can’t update them any sooner than
16⅔ ms in the worst case.  That gives you 8.04 ns to decide what color
to make each pixel.  Not a lot of time to copy pixels around in
messages!

I think there is something interesting in the idea of caching
redirects to curried functions, though — maybe applicable in systems
that don’t involve IPC, too.  If you can delegate a particular call to
a chain of particular other functions (perhaps with added arguments)
and cache that delegation in a way that doesn’t involve running
through the whole chain of functions again because the last function
in the chain has an input change, then you can do efficient OO method
dispatch in just that way, as well as things like delegating painting
a particular part of a window to a particular widget.  Maybe you could
handle it like backtracking: save a series of backtrack points, and
handle invalidation notifications by resetting the backtrack state for
that cache entry to point to one of those earlier backtrack points,
which could literally be an address to jump to in a piece of code.
Maybe?