Looking at STMicroelectronics’s appnote AN392, “Doc ID 1863”.  It’s a
little bit shocking, though hopefully not literally; it contains a
very cost-optimized, compact power supply circuit for microcontroller
projects that can be kept safely away from the delicate bodies of the
humans.

Quoting Horowitz and Hill:

> Never build an instrument to run off the powerline without an
> isolating transformer!  To do so is to flirt with disaster.
> Transformerless power supplies, which have been popular in some
> consumer electronics (radios and televisions, particularly) because
> they’re inexpensive, put the circuit at high voltage with respect to
> external ground (water pipes, etc.).  This has no place in
> instruments intended to interconnect with any other equipment and
> should always be avoided.  And use extreme caution when servicing
> any such equipment; just connecting your oscilloscope probe to the
> chassis can be a shocking experience.

Consequently they do not explain how to build such consumer
electronics (though they promise that chapter *9x* will.)  This
appnote is about how to do it, a topic also occasionally discussed in
the YouTube channel of bigclivedotcom.  So how do they suggest doing
it?

Outline of the capacitor-dropper circuit
----------------------------------------

They’re running an ST6210 8-bit microcontroller directly off the hot
side of mains current, connected to the touch sensor at the human’s
finger through two or three 4.7-MΩ resistors (thus at 340V peak you
get 36 microamps or less, not enough to feel).  The 5-volt rail is
literally the hot side of the power line (though fused), but the
“ground” is floating; a simple regulated capacitor dropper produces
about 5 volts on the ground rail as follows.  The neutral side of the
power line is connected to an 820Ω half-watt resistor, which is
connected to a 220-nF 400-V capacitor, which is connected to the low
side of a 5.6-volt zener diode, whose positive end is connected to the
5-volt rail.  A 1N4148 clamps the ground rail to be no more than 0.7
volts above the low end of the zener, and there’s a 100-μF 10-volt
energy storage capacitor connected between the ground and the 5-volt
rail.

(This appnote is from 1998, so this is not capacitive touch sensing;
instead, the human’s finger forms part of a voltage divider between
the hot and neutral powerline rails, protected by the megohms.)

How the regulated capacitor dropper works
-----------------------------------------

This is not quite a standard capacitive voltage divider circuit.

The 220-nF capacitor produces a 12–15-kΩ reactance at 50–60 Hz,
losslessly limiting the current to 20 mA by itself; I assume the 820-Ω
resistor is to limit inrush current, because it has ≪1% effect at
powerline frequencies.  At steady state, with the storage capacitor
charged, this current sloshes back and forth across the zener
(remember that the high end of the zener is directly attached to the
hot side of the power line), but when the zener is reverse-biased and
the capacitor is discharged, there’s an easier return circuit path
through the capacitor and 1N4148, which initially only has a 600-mV
voltage drop before starting to conduct heavily rather than the
zener’s 5.6 volts.  Once the capacitor is charged, though, the zener
becomes the easier current return path, and the return current flows
through it instead.

20 mA through 820 Ω gives you 330 mW, which is why you can’t use a ¼-W
resistor.  The zener is also going to dissipate 55 mW.  An ideal
dropper capacitor wouldn’t dissipate anything but real dropper
capacitors will have some dielectric heating from the constant 20
milliamps, or 10 milliamps at 120Vrms; this will probably be on the
order of 1 mW.  The rest of the circuit should have much smaller power
consumption.

They say their board uses 3 mA; the 100-μF storage capacitor will then
discharge at 30 V/s, or 0.6 V in the 20 ms between 50-Hz peaks.

The results: regulated 5V from the powerline with five discrete passives
------------------------------------------------------------------------

So with five simple passive components and no electromagnetics you get
a regulated 5 volts directly out of the power line.  It’s just not
safe to touch the circuit while it’s turned on, or to connect it to
any other circuits, and the dropping capacitor is a bit of a beast.
In file `capacitors` I have some pricing info on smaller, totally
inappropriate capacitors; the 19.4¢ Nichicon UWT1H470MCL1GS is 47μF
and 50V, so you would need strings of 8 of them to get the required
400 volts, but each such string would only have 6 μF, so you would
need 38 such strings in parallel for a total of 304 capacitors costing
a total of US$60.  Capacitors designed for such applications would
probably be smaller, cheaper, and cooler.

You probably don’t need a bleeder resistor across the dropper cap (and
the ST appnote doesn’t show one); if you unplug it at the wrong part
of the cycle, it could have 340 volts across it, but since it’s only
220 nF, that’s only 18 mJ, not enough to be dangerous to a human.
It’ll blow holes in your MOSFETs, though.

Unlike a standard capacitive voltage divider, the output voltage
barely depends at all on the input voltage or the dropper capacitance.
The dropper capacitor just serves to limit current and thus power
dissipation.  The output voltage is determined by the zener, or more
precisely the zener minus the rectifier diode’s forward voltage; the
only relationship to the input voltage is that the output can’t be
more than the peak-to-peak input voltage (minus a couple of diode
drops) and if it gets close you will have less current draw.
Moreover, this power supply always draws very nearly the same current,
whether anything is running from it or not, unless the current load is
so high as to substantially drop the voltage in the power-storage
capacitor.

This means, of course, that its efficiency is always terrible: as bad
as 0% (when the load is turned off) and never much more than 30% or
so.

The context: controlling mains power with triacs
------------------------------------------------

The appnote isn’t about regulated capacitor droppers; it just mentions
in passing that “the board supply comes from the mains through a
simple RCD circuit”.  The appnote is actually about controlling triacs
(“the least expensive power switch to operate directly on the 110/240
V mains”); it recommends using a microcontroller to inject a turn-on
pulse at the appropriate point in the cycle.  In the appnote ST
recommended a BTA 16-600CW triac for motor control so as to need no
snubber, but it needs 60 mA to trigger it.  The more common (?)  95¢
T405Q-600B-TR I mentioned in file `jellybeans` would work and only
needs 5 mA, but would presumably require a snubber.

So in ST’s appnote the inefficiency of this power supply is
insignificant: if you’re controlling a 700-watt vacuum cleaner with a
15-mW microcontroller, it hardly matters that you’re burning 200 or
400 mW to get a regulated power supply, as long as you don’t have
dozens and dozens of vacuum cleaners plugged in for every one you’re
using.

Capacitive droppers for micropower IoT?
---------------------------------------

In file `stm32` I calculated datasheet power consumption for a number
of STM32 processors; even without using power-down modes, a number of
them would run at under 50 μA at 131 kHz, and with power-down modes
you could reasonably reduce power consumption by another factor of
1000, although as mentioned in file `bitbang-am-radio`, it’s easy to
leak multiple microamps through your bypass capacitors.  This suggests
that 10 μA might be a reasonable current to design an embeddable
powerline-powered IoT device for.  (As long as it doesn’t have to be
controlling a triac or something, anyway.)

Adapting the above design for the lower current level, though, the
dropper capacitor could be 220 pF instead of 220 nF, the storage
capacitor could be 0.1 μF instead of 100 μF, and the input resistor
would, I think, be unnecessary.  Using the *C* = *εA*/*d* formula for
capacitance, *ε*<sub>*r*</sub> of 3 and an egregiously large plate
separation of 1 mm, you could get the capacitance you need from 83 cm²
of foil “shielding” wrapped around a plastic-insulated electrical
line.  (3 is a reasonable guess for many plastics.)  That’s a rather
large chunk of foil, though, and a better option might be to run a
high-efficiency buck regulator off a smaller piece of foil instead of
just regulating with a zener.

If you’re going to try to go with such a capacitive connection, you
might want to do it on both the hot wire and the neutral wire, despite
this requiring four times as much foil.  That way, you have no dc
connection to the powerline at all.

In theory at these current levels you could use reeally thin wires.
In file `balcony-battery` I estimated that 142-μm copper wire would
probably work for five-amp fuse wire.  Suppose that’s correct.  Here
the wire needs to carry ten thousand times less current, so it can
have ten thousand times less surface area per resistance, which means
it could be 21 times narrower and thus have 21 times less surface area
and 441 times more resistance.  But that would be 7-μm copper wire,
which is going to be hard to find and maybe even a bit dangerous to
handle.  If we take copper’s resistivity to be 16.78 nΩ·m, as in file
`executable-scholarship`, that wire is 436 Ω/m.

I’m pretty sure a 220-pF 400-V X7R ceramic capacitor would be a few
millimeters in size and cost under a dollar, and that’s a much better
option than meters of foil snaking around your conduits and junction
boxes.  But it means that you need a direct non-galvanically-isolated
electrical connection to the mains power and thus a fuse.
