I have this idea for a vastly more effective and efficient heat
exchanger.

The basic issue is that heat exchangers have a tradeoff between
thermal resistance and fluid resistance.  Ideally you want to drive
both of these parameters as far as possible toward zero, but thinner
tubes or turbulence mean less thermal resistance and more fluid
resistance, while thicker tubes or laminar flow mean less fluid
resistance and more thermal resistance.

Consider recuperator-type heat exchangers, which use two separate
fluids, typically in a countercurrent configuration.

I suspect you may be able to cut this Gordian knot using fractal
geometry like that of the lungs.  The idea is to perform almost all of
the heat exchange along a very convoluted (wrinkly) fractal surface
whose Euclidean dimension is 2 but whose Hausdorff-Besicovitch
dimension is nearly 3.  This surface is full of tiny capillaries, and
it separates two volumes from each other, which we can denominate the
“arterial” and “venous” volumes.  These spaces are not themselves
empty; each one contains two separate, non-communicating sets of
branching passages which branch down to the capillaries.  In one of
these sets of passages, one fluid passes from the arterial space to
the venous space; in the other, a potentially separate fluid passes
from the venous space to the arterial space.

Each of these two spaces looks a lot like a cauliflower, with a
branching tree structure (or rather two of them) of passages feeding a
very rough surface.

The two sets of passages are separate and do not mix, but they
intertwine progressively more intimately until, at the capillary
boundary, they are separated only by very thin walls.  Nearly all of
the heat is transferred during the passage through the capillaries,
and nearly all of the fluid resistance is also due to this passage
through these thin capillaries; the passages in the arterial and
venous spaces are so much wider than the capillaries that they offer
relatively little resistance.  But, because the surface through which
the capillaries pass is so enormously convoluted, the total
cross-sectional surface area of the capillaries is immense, allowing
the fluids to pass with relatively little resistance.

You could imagine the convoluted membrane filling, say, 80% of a
one-liter volume with a 50-μm thickness penetrated by many
10-μm-diameter capillaries some 10 μm apart.  Roughly estimating, this
gives you 16 m² of membrane pierced by 4 m² of capillary
cross-sectional area dived among 40 billion capillaries, 2 m² for each
of the two fluids.  A flow rate of 500mℓ/s amounts to 250 microns/s
through these capillaries; that is, the fluid spends about 200ms in
the capillary, during which time it is in somewhat more intimate
thermal contact with the other fluid 20μm away through the capillary
wall than it is with its own predecessor or successor fluid 50μm away
through the capillary.

(Branching to 20 billion capillaries involves some 34 levels of
branching if they are binary.)

The cross-section through which the heat must travel by conduction is
some twenty times (5× length, 4× four directions if the capillaries
are in a checkerboard through the membrane) the cross-section of the
capillaries themselves, so 40 m².  Aluminum has a thermal conductivity
of some 205 W/m/K; multiplying that by 40m²/10μm gives us 820 MW/K,
which is a dramatically enormous number.

Some [random online pipe pressure drop calculator] tells me that,
given .000000000025 l/s (25 pℓ/s, 250 microns/s * 10 microns * 10
microns), pipe diameter of 0.010 mm, pipe roughness of 0.001 mm, and
pipe length of .000050 m, the flow should be laminar and the pressure
drop should be 0.05 millibar if the fluid is water.  That’s 5 Pa or a
column height of 0.5 mm of water.  God only knows if it’s using some
approximation or other that isn’t valid at these scales, but it’s
somewhat reassuring.

[random online pipe pressure drop calculator]: http://www.pressure-drop.com/Online-Calculator/

These two figures together suggest that you should be able to pump
considerably larger amounts of heat and fluids through this heat
exchanger.  If we consider a 5 kelvin loss acceptable, then maybe we
can deal with 4100 MW in our one-liter heat exchanger.  Water can hold
perhaps 100kcal/kg; that gives us 9800 kg/s, which is 9800 ℓ/s, which
would be 4.9 m/s through the 2m² of capillaries, which amounts to 0.49
microliters per second per capillary.  Entering this into the same
calculator provides me with an answer of 999.83 millibar, or 10.2
meters of water column height, which is to say, one atmosphere.

If we take this seriously, it would seem that we can probably
nanofabricate a 4-gigawatt water-based countercurrent heat exchanger
with a 5-kelvin temperature drop, with only one atmosphere of pumping
pressure, in a single liter.  I find these numbers so outlandish that
they are hard to take seriously, but I wonder how close we could
really get.

(In some cases you might have a much lower heat capacity per unit
volume, for example with air, and desire a much lower delta
temperature, like 5 millikelvins.  I think this is also achievable.)

Previous work
-------------

Apparently Lingai Luo wrote a book on this in 2013, “Heat and Mass
Transfer Intensification and Shape Optimization”; they proposed doing
this in 2001.  In 2002, Yongping Chen and Ping Cheng wrote a paper,
“Heat transfer and pressure drop in fractal tree-like microchannel
nets”, surveying the existing work and proposing a two-dimensional
coolant duct structure for cooling semiconductor chips.  They have 275
citations in Google Scholar, and since then there has been a lot of
work in convection in porous and complex structures, including a [2004
book by Bejan], Lorente, and others.  It contains this remarkable
passage:

> Tree-shaped flows in balanced counterflow are a prevailing flow
> structure in subskin vascularized tissues (Weinbaum and Jiji, 1985;
> Bejan, 2001). The purpose of the intimate thermal contact between
> the streams in counterflow is to minimize the leakage of heat (an
> enthalpy current) along the counterflow, from the warm end to the
> cold end. The counterflow provides thermal insulation in the flow
> direction: this insulation effect has its origin in the minimization
> of thermal resistance in the direction perpendicular to the streams
> (Bejan, 1979b, 1982). This special feature, and the fact that the
> streamwise leakage of heat vanishes as the thermal contact between
> streams becomes perfect, is the reason why the balanced counterflow
> is the best arrangement from the point of view of minimizing heat
> transfer irreversibilities.

Unfortunately, although he arranges his flows dendritically, Bejan’s
work does not seem to contemplate distributing the capillaries
themselves over a fractal surface, although he alludes to lungs at
some point.

He also describes our lungs:

> The alveoli act as the primary gas exchange units of the lungs. It
> is estimated that an adult has approximately 600 million alveoli
> with a surface area for gas exchange of about 75 m², which are
> perfused by more than 2000 km of capillaries (see Section 6.2). ...
> In order to optimize its function (see Section 4.11), the airway
> tree exhibits 23 levels of bifurcations after the trachea (Weibel,
> 1963).

[2004 book by Bejan]: http://dspace.uevora.pt/rdpc/bitstream/10174/5475/1/Porous%20and%20complex%20flow%20structures.pdf

Note that this 75 m² in a few liters is comparable to the exchange
area I described above for the heat exchanger.

That topology-optimization guy in Scandinavia has been using topology
optimization to design heatsinks using CFD simulation of convection.
Understandably, they come out dendritic.

Luo’s book is about “process intensification”, which she defined in
2001 as “enhancement of the density of flux transferred between two
phases through an interface”, which covers the heat-exchanger thing
above as well as many other possibilities.  Its chapter 4 is all about
heat exchangers, and it says:

> Microchannel heat exchangers usually have a surface area density
> above about 10,000 m²·m⁻³ (Shah 1991). One typical example in nature
> is the human lungs, as a very high performance ultra compact heat
> and mass transfer system which have a surface area density of about
> 17,500 m²·m⁻³.

The numbers I postulated above work out to about 80,000, so it isn’t
too far from what people were already achieving in 1991.  A Karlsruhe
project got 18000 MW/m³ by these techniques, with a pressure drop of 4
bar (400 kPa), a 10-kelvin temperature jump, and a residence time of
about 2ms, while my calculations above suggested you should be able to
get 4 terawatts/m³ (i.e. 4,000,000 MW/m³), which suggests that my
calculations are perhaps a bit optimistic but not entirely out of the
ballpark.  The Karlsruhe device, however, did not use a fractal
geometry, and it used crossflow rather than counterflow.

Luo also points out that for microchannel heat exchangers you probably
don’t actually want to use a highly conductive material, because it
conducts heat longitudinally in the wrong direction.  You’d be better
off with a highly insulating material, something silly like
polyethylene!  And this is far more important for the kinds of
geometries I'm considering.

Luo does at some point start using fractal designs for her multi-scale
distributors, but never for the capillary-bearing surface itself.  She
proposes a multi-scale branched tree structure, but don’t give
performance figures.  She does cite da Silva et al. 2004 (“Constructal
multi-scalar tree-shaped heat exchangers”) and Zimparov et al. 2006
(“Constructal tree-shaped parallel flow heat exchangers”).  The
designs in Zimparov’s and da Silva’s papers are basically the same as
the Chen and Cheng 2002 paper: essentially planar trees.

Luo’s Chapter 7 shows the optimization of the distributor/collector
network from chapter 3 (which is basically the same as Chen and
Cheng’s) using cellular automata to improve flow, but never leaving
two dimensions.

Sun, Huang, and Zhang did a paper in 2015 where they did a CFD
analysis of the Chen and Cheng planar fractal heat exchanger.

Poltorak applied for a US patent in 2012 (publication 20120285660 A1,
application US 13/106,640) which is more about branching heatsinks
fractally to keep them from whistling.  He’s now formed a patent troll
company to extort money with his patent, called Fractal Heatsinks Inc.
But this is not really relevant.

As mentioned in file `recuperator-heat-storage`, Galen discovered heat
exchangers with this structure 1800 years ago dissecting animals, and
in anatomy they are known as [retia mirabilia].  They are used both
for heat transfer (for example, to prevent heat loss in the legs of
sheep) and for mass transfer (for example, in all mammalian kidneys).

[retia mirabilia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retia_mirabilia

Other applications other than recuperator-type heat exchangers
--------------------------------------------------------------

Although heat exchangers themselves are very important — a perfect
heat exchanger makes compressed-air energy storage 100% efficient, for
example — there are other possible uses of this geometry.

Luo’s book mentions a number of applications of “process
intensification” beyond just heat exchangers, and Luo’s and Bejan’s
books both go into some detail on mass transfer in lungs and kidneys.
But in fact this kind of broccoli-like design can be used for a
variety of other things as well:

- If you have just a single fluid, this kind of design provides a more
  efficient regenerator-type heat exchanger, although the advantage
  there over the traditional designs is smaller.  You can use it with
  modern microencapsulated phase-change materials to get unprecedented
  regenerator performance.
- Catalytic chemical processes can, in some cases, benefit from mixing
  reagents uniformly and intimately as they pass over a catalyst.
  This design provides that possibility; the only missing piece is to
  run both fluids in a co-current direction and join their
  capillaries.
- Non-catalytic chemical processes, too.  Consider feeding fuel
  (e.g. propane) and oxidizer (e.g. oxygen) through the two sets of
  passages at a controlled rate, mixing and heating evenly at the
  surface and producing a controlled hot blast of oxidation products
  on the other side.
- If some substance like water can diffuse through the walls between
  the capillaries, this design can work for mass transfer as well as
  heat transfer.
- If the substance you’re transferring heat to is water, you can
  flash-boil it and get a steam explosion.  A .22 LR pistol puts about
  75 J of kinetic energy into its bullet in about 2 ms, a power of
  about 40 kW.  The case on its cartridge is 15.6 mm long by 5.7 mm
  diameter, about 400 mm³.  That works out to about 94 GW/m³
  (94 MW/ℓ), so even the Karlsruhe heat exchanger mentioned above, at
  18 GW/m³, is only a factor of five below the power density of a
  handgun cartridge, modulo the Carnot limit.  This means you can
  totally make a steam-powered gun that’s competitive in size and
  power to explosive-powered guns.
