A common way we organize storage in computer programs is as a
Cartesian product of some set of entities and some set of attributes
that pertain to those entities.  We might represent entities as, for
example, struct base addresses or array indices, and attributes as,
respectively, offsets into a struct and array base addresses.

In both of these cases, at the machine level, we are representing both
entities and items as machine words and combining them with binary
addition, possibly composed with a bit shift or even multiplication by
a constant.  In some cases, you can use a simpler operation, dividing
the memory address into one field for entities and another for
attributes, which could save you an adder at the hardware level; this
allocates memory space of a power of 2 to each entity and each
attribute.  Combining the fields in hardware can be done with some
wires.

What happens if you try to use some other operation to combine the
identifiers of entities and attributes?  An easy example is to use a
limited-width adder: given a 16-bit entity address and an 8-bit struct
offset, use a 10-bit adder rather than a 16-bit adder to combine them,
and then don’t allocate structs that cross 1024-byte page boundaries.
This is intermediate both in restrictions and in implementation
complexity between the field-division approach and the usual approach.

In the same context, if you use XOR instead of an adder, you have the
same memory-allocation restrictions as the field-division approach,
but now you have the ability to reverse the order of the list of
entities (or of attributes, or of power-of-2-sized blocks of either)
by using an address with 1 bits in the field for the other kind of
thing.

If you use OR or AND instead of XOR, you have the same restriction
again — but now stray bits (ones in the OR case, zeroes in the AND
case) allow a sort of “inheritance”.  Instead of reversing the order
of the entities, or of entities in some subgroup (or correspondingly
attributes), they allow an attribute to be shared among all entities,
or all entities in a power-of-2 group; or, correspondingly, to allow
an entity to have the same value for all attributes, or all attributes
in a power-of-2 group.

This seems like it could be useful under some circumstances; you could
imagine, for example, allocating memory for a potentially buffer-local
variable in every buffer, then making the variable buffer-local by
changing its “offset”.

(The other possible 13 bitwise operations all seem to fall into the
same category as one of OR/AND and XOR or be inapplicable. Operations
with truth tables 0000 and 1111 discard both inputs, and 0011, 1100,
0101, and 1010 discard one of their inputs.  1000 (NOR) and 1110
(NAND) are simply AND and OR (respectively) with both inputs inverted;
1001 (XNOR) is XOR with one input inverted; 0010 and 0100 (implication
and reverse implication) are AND with one input inverted; 1101 and
1011 (negated implication and negated reverse implication) are OR with
one input inverted.)
