Let’s explore why rich societies are more economically productive, and
why both Kantian and utilitarian ethics forbid exploit development and
SEO, as explained by _Bill & Ted’s Excellent Adventure_.

A tale of three hobbies: the bad, the good, and the ugly
--------------------------------------------------------

Suppose almost everyone in the world worked really hard to get better
at football as a hobby, instead of wasting their time watching non-football TV or
getting angry about politics.  The level of professional football
games would improve, but there would still be about the same number of
professional football games; maybe a little more diversity, but just
as today, most people would watch the matches of the top clubs and not
the much larger number of bush-league matches.  So the overall
well-being of the world would increase, but only a little.  Or maybe
it would decrease, if more people tore their knee ligaments.  Either
way, it would be pretty much the same.

Suppose that, instead, almost everyone in the world worked really hard
to get good at medicine as a hobby — doing paramedic training, reading
case studies, predicting patient outcomes, doing Gwern-style
double-blind self-experiments, performing recreational plastic surgery
on their pets, that kind of thing.  The level of health care would
improve dramatically — deaths due to drug interactions the prescribing
physician failed to notice would go way down, people’s decisions about
when to go to the emergency room would be much more accurate, people’s
lifestyle choices would become slightly healthier, and medical science
would advance much more rapidly.  The overall well-being of the world
would increase substantially.

On the gripping hand, suppose that almost everyone in the world worked
really hard to get good at fighting with kitchen knives.  Perhaps the
level of Olympic fencing would improve substantially, which would make
for enjoyable TV — though perhaps the sports are far enough apart that
it wouldn’t transfer — but it’s also likely that a larger fraction of
fights would involve knives instead of just shouting or fists, usually
killing one or more people.  The training, too, would probably involve
a certain number of accidental fatalities, and some fraction of those
would lead to revenge killings.  More children would be orphaned.  The
overall well-being of the world would diminish.

On this basis, I claim that it would be better for almost everyone to
take up medicine as a hobby than football, and better football than
knife fighting; and this is because knife-fighting is a negative-sum
game, football is a zero-sum game, and medicine is a positive-sum
“game”.

“Party on, and be excellent to each other,” Kant, and robbing old women
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

As I remember, sage Dave Long at some point unpacked the Bill and Ted
philosophy as follows: “party on” means not to engage in negative-sum
“games” — in the very general sense of “interactions with other
agents” — and “be excellent” means to engage in positive-sum games.
To the extent that you can control which “games” you “play”, it is
better to invest your limited time in positive-sum games.  (Sage
Shakyamuni reportedly took the alternative position that you should
not waste your time playing any games, because you are going to die
soon, while the sages of Wyld Stallyns instead played games to defeat
death itself.)

Of course, a person may find themself in a situation where it is more
advantageous to them personally to direct their effort to a zero-sum
game or a negative-sum game.  Consider the thief who spotted my
neighbor, an old woman, at the bus stop last month, and decided to
knock her down and beat her to steal $300 from her (about US$7).  He
chose to direct his efforts to robbing her, and although he injured
her in the process, he presumably considered that a worthwhile
tradeoff, because it satisfied his desires for food or crack or
whatever.  A pyramid-scheme participant who recruits downstream
members is doing the same thing, but in a less courageous way, and the
injury is delivered via deception to the victim’s mind, rather than
via a stick to her knee.

From a consequentialist point of view, this is a bad outcome if we
consider the thief and their victim to be equally important, so that
the loss of money by one is precisely canceled by the gain of money by
the other, while the putative injury or deception has no such
counterbalancing benefit.  If the consequentialist considers the
thief’s profit to be more important — perhaps because the thief is
poorer and therefore benefits more from the money, or perhaps because
they subscribe to a worldview where it is better for the money to go
to a brave thief rather than a cowardly
victim, or a smart thief rather than a stupid victim,
or simply because they are racist — then the consequentialist
can justify the theft as morally correct.  But an *egalitarian*
consequentialist cannot so justify theft or any other negative-sum
game.

Neither can a deontologist who subscribes to Kant’s categorical
imperative, which is of course (XXX) one of Kant’s first examples; the
thief cannot at the same time will that the victim should steal their
money back, delivering the same beating to the thief, because that
would leave the thief bruised but no richer.  Only by some kind of
special pleading can the Kantian thief save his livelihood, and the
same kinds of special pleading that the consequentialist could use to
justify the theft can be used to exempt the thief from the maxim that
would otherwise strip his stolen money from him.  Again, this logic
applies equally well to any negative-sum game.

For an egalitarian consequentialist, the imperative to “be
excellent” — to play positive-sum games rather than zero-sum
games — is just as strong as the imperative to “party on”, that is,
not play negative-sum games.  Kant’s theory (like most deontologist theories)
also regards it as a “perfect duty”, and thus obligatory, to “party on”
in every possible way — at least in the specific examples Kant
gives — but regard it as a supererogatory “imperfect duty” to “be
excellent”.

XXX this description of Kant’s incoherency criterion is itself
incoherent and needs reworking

Computer security, the nuclear arms race, advertising, and SEO
--------------------------------------------------------------

In theory, since computers only do what you program them to do, you
could decide not to program them to accept arbitrary commands from random people
anywhere on the internet, instead only programming them to accept
arbitrary commands from their actual owners.  That is, there is no
need for software to contain security holes.  Computer security
violations are not inevitable.  They are the result of undiscovered
programming mistakes, which is why the most significant forum for
announcing and fixing security holes in the 1990s was called BUGTRAQ.

In the late 1990s I spent some effort finding security holes in
software and reporting them to get them fixed.  Unfortunately, it
became increasingly apparent that the current economic and
intellectual environment was going to introduce new security holes
faster than we could remove them, so rather than a gradually
decreasing pool of still-undiscovered security holes, we have a
gradually increasing one, with the disastrous effects on the human
right to privacy documented by the Snowden revelations.

In such an environment, exploit users and defenders are in a sort of
arms race, a literal race to see who can respond faster.  If the
defender is faster to patch a newly discovered hole in deployed
systems, they win that round; if the exploit user is faster to acquire
and employ an exploit for it, they win that round.  So whenever one
side or the other increases their commitment of resources and gets
ahead a bit, the other side has the option of matching that increase
to get back to the previous equilibrium.

This sounds like a zero-sum game, but in a larger context, it’s
negative-sum: the human effort spent on the vulnerability treadmill is
taken from the time available for making music, discovering new
algorithms, cooking food, meditating, painting pictures, writing
poetry, reading poetry, watching movies, making love, or raising
children.  Every sysadmin on call who has to patch the production
systems within an hour so that exploit users won’t break in with the
newly announced vulnerability is spending the irreplaceable minutes of
their life on a Red Queen’s race with the spies at the NSA or the FSB.
They are falling short of partying on.

Of course, neither side can unilaterally scale back its efforts; that
would amount to surrender.  If it’s your job to keep your employer’s
public-facing systems up to date so they don’t get popped, you can’t
just decide it’s not worth the effort.  But you can find a new job.

There are other drawbacks as well: it’s no longer a viable option to
continue running outdated software unless it’s in a very unusual
isolated environment, like a non-networked video game, and the
increasingly rapid and frequent response required to new
vulnerabilities has the effect of centralizing both patching and
exploit use in large organizations.  This means everyone is exposed to
the risks of deploying untested new software on short notice and to
having strangers administer their most intimate computer systems, such
as Android hand computers.  Also, sometimes patching a vulnerability
unavoidably introduces incompatibilities, causing bitrot.

So I stopped spending effort on that.

The nuclear arms race during the Cold War had a similar dynamic: each
side constantly worked to preserve a second-strike capability (by,
among other things, building enough warheads that some would be likely
to survive a first strike from the other side) and to find ways to
remove the other side’s second-strike capability.  Neither side could
opt out of the game, but the result of both sides playing it harder
and harder was the decades-long threat that civilization could end at
any time, with 20 minutes of warning.

Fortunately there were also people on both sides like Jonas Salk,
Norman Borlaug, and Andrey Kolmogorov who were able to dedicate their
lives to positive-sum games instead of the negative-sum game of the
nuclear arms race.

Commercial competition is, in theory, a positive-sum game, though
eventually only slightly so — as more and higher-frequency
participants in a stock market means fairer prices, with retail
participants having to pay much narrower spreads to the market-makers,
more competition in consumer-goods markets should result in goods
priced just above the lowest possible marginal cost of production.
One reason this doesn’t happen in practice is advertising: consumers
buy goods that are advertised rather than equivalent goods that are
not, and in many cases are induced to buy categories of goods they
wouldn’t have bought at all without advertising.

This puts advertising in the negative-sum category: to survive, firms
are forced to push positive information about their products in front
of customers, whether that’s by traditional display ads and flyers, by
getting newspapers to write articles about them, by commissioning
shill research (such as rigged Gartner product comparisons), by buying
product placements in supermarkets and music videos, or by doing SEO
on their web pages.  Moreover, they cannot afford to be much more
forthcoming about the drawbacks of their products, or less
enthusiastic about their benefits, than their competition is, unless
consumers are turned off by their immodest hucksterism.

To the extent that consumers can find objective research about the
relative merits of different products and distinguish it from the
advertising, all these strategies will be ineffective, so firms must
work harder and harder to disguise their hustle and puffery as
objective research, making it harder and harder for customers to find
objective information about their products and, ultimately, about
anything at all.

And so it is that if you search for almost any commercially relevant
topic on Google today, the results are the Wikipedia article and nine
shill pages.

Selfish reasons for avoiding negative-sum and zero-sum games
------------------------------------------------------------

You might reasonably think there’s a prisoner’s-dilemma-type
global-local incentive conflict when it comes to playing negative-sum
games: even if it is not in the interest of society as a whole that
you beat up old women to rob them, you might perceive it as in your
*own* interest, however you define that.  And surely for some
definitions you will sometimes be correct.  But this happens less
often than you might think.

First, let’s consider negative-sum games like retail day-trading, in
which all the participants are voluntary (as contrasted with the game
of robbing old women at the bus stop, in which my neighbor was an
involuntary participant).  This is a mildly negative-sum game because
of broker commissions and the spreads paid to market makers, which are
siphoned off of the otherwise-zero-sum transactions between retail
day-traders.  (The advent of penny pricing and algorithmic HFT has
enormously diminished the magnitude of the spreads in the last 15 or
20 years.)

Presumably most of the participants in the game believe it is in their
interest to participate, although there might be a few acknowledged
addicts who just haven’t managed to quit even though they know it’s
bad for them.  But many of them are wrong, more than half in this
case.  That means that if you think it’s in your interest to
participate because you will make money, you’re likely just mistaken.
In this market you really are behind a Rawlsian veil of ignorance, not
knowing if you are predator or prey.  I’ve watched smarter people than
myself waste fortunes on such mistakes.

But there’s another, subtler problem.  The people who participate in
some activity, whether it’s football, day trading, knife fighting,
medicine, SEO, or beating and robbing old women, form an affinity
group — a “community of practice”, it’s sometimes called.  They tend
to talk to each other, sharing information about their shared
activity, and often they engage in other transactions with one
another — cellphone thieves need cellphone fences, for example, who in
some sense form part of the same community of criminal practice.  So
if you decide to spend time day trading, you’re also implicitly
deciding you’re going to spend some time hanging out with day traders,
talking with them, maybe buying them a beer from time to time.  And
similarly if you do any kind of medicine — even if you’re just taking
CPR training — you’re going to spend some time hanging out with
medical people.

So, we can reasonably ask, how might hanging out with medical people
differ from hanging out with cellphone thieves?  And there are a lot
of answers that are specific to these fields of endeavor (for example,
medical people tend to be from Cuba, while cellphone thieves tend to
own motorcycles) but one difference that’s common across all these
fields is that the kind of people who choose to play negative-sum
games are (however slightly) the kind of people who choose to play
negative-sum games, valuing their individual interests over others’,
while the kind of people who choose to play positive-sum games are
less so.

We can renormalize this and get a stronger result: if you beat up old
women to rob them, then the people who choose to hang out with you
knowing this will tend to be people who think that’s a reasonable
choice, but who aren’t afraid you will beat them up and rob
them — often because they think they’re stronger than you, which
(refer to previous lemma) they believe justifies robbing you.  And
similarly for SEOs, advertisers, day traders, and soldiers, with
appropriate variations.

So, if you go out drinking with doctors and with day traders, you
should expect the day traders to stick you with the tab more often.
Maybe not much, but detectably.  And if you hang out with people who
beat up old women to rob them, you’re likely to get robbed, one way or
another.

(Of course, it’s also possible that someone could take revenge on you.
But that’s true in positive-sum games too — positive-sum games aren’t
always win-win, though zero-sum and negative-sum games are never
win-win.)

This doesn’t mean you’re better off if you hang out with people who
*advocate* playing positive-sum games and not playing negative-sum
games.  A noticeable fraction of them are just trying to talk you into
giving them your money, or your volunteer time, or your vote, or
leaving your monogamous partner alone with them, or whatever.

Social capital, factionalism, and negative-sum games
----------------------------------------------------

“Social capital” is often invoked to explain why rich countries
experience vastly higher levels of economic productivity from workers
with similar levels of education employing similar levels of capital
intensity than poor coutries do; the effect is so strong that poor
people from poor countries can greatly improve their income simply by
working in rich countries.

After 12 years of living in Argentina and plenty of opportunity to
contrast the beliefs and practices of different social groups, one of
my conclusions is that much of what is known as “social capital” or
“high trust societies” amounts to a self-reinforcing tendency for
people to play positive-sum games rather than negative-sum games, or
to play positive-sum games in a wider context (not, for example, only
within their own family); and this accounts for the otherwise puzzling
overwhelming dominance of Wikipedia contributions from highly
developed countries, far out of proportion to any difference in
literate populations.

Here in Argentina, two centuries of often-militarized factionalism has
created a profound cynicism about politics and about any attempt to
carry out positive-sum projects; politicians get and maintain power by
polarizing their constituents against other politicians and their
constituents and by using the state to extract wealth to give to their
own supporters, with the unsurprising result that everyone has
concluded that all politicians are thieves and liars — because
would-be politicians who are not thieves and liars are not successful
at gaining support.

The popular belief here that all games are zero-sum is so strong that
an Argentine woman told me once that Argentine cars are of poorer
quality than American cars because American companies send their
defective parts to Argentina, as if statistical process control worked
by producing several times the needed quantity of goods and discarding
most of them.  This belief is strengthened by the Reagan-like
deployment of positive-sum rhetoric by politicians to promote
negative-sum policies that enrich the rich at the expense of the poor;
Macri, our current president, is especially guilty of this, and his
economic policies have been disastrous.

We can also argue for a subtler effect, similar to the renormalization
argument in the previous section.  Leaders of factionalist ignoramus
societies, such as Donald Trump, Hugo Chávez, or Mauricio Macri,
cannot afford to take advice from the intelligentsia, or put them in
charge of policy, even if they could figure out who they were; they
are forced to assume that wiser heads from other factions are looking
for ways to defeat them, and will use delegation of authority or even
openness to advice as a way to undermine their leadership.  (See file
`notch-scorn` for pompous bloviation on this topic.)  Instead, they
are forced to delegate authority to people loyal to their own faction,
and listen only to their advice, with the predictably disastrous
consequences we are seeing today in Venezuela.

(Given that Trump is president of the country with half of the world’s
top universities, it may seem strange to call it a “factionalist
ignoramus society” — but Trump has apparently spent his entire life
playing zero-sum and negative-sum games, and is certainly an ignoramus
who surrounds himself with ignoramuses, and almost half the population
of the country voted for him anyway.  So clearly the factionalist
ignoramus element of that society, always significant, is today its
dominant element, just as in Germany after 1933.)

You might think that the pervasive belief in zero-sum-ness would make
it impossible to motivate voters to participate in politics at all,
since clearly whatever time you spend handing out campaign fliers or
getting gassed by the cops (a nearly universal experience among the
lower and middle class in Argentina) isn’t going to be compensated by
the marginally increased chance of your party winning at the polls and
putting in place whatever policies you favor, even presuming those
policies benefit you and not just the politicians you elected.  But
humans are not primarily motivated by such calculations, and never
have been; any who were would fail Newcomb tests and be cast out of
society to die in the wilderness.

Suppressing factionalism is no panacea either — whenever those in
power pursue foolish policies, they can reasonably accuse anyone who
criticizes those policies of fomenting factionalism, and this commonly
happens in modern China, in the modern Bahá’í ecclesiastical
hierarchy, and in the medieval Catholic church, for example, all of
which have or had strong taboos against factionalism.  Just as extreme
factionalism deprives the leadership of the benefit of the collective
cognition of the wise, so too does conformism.
