A group of students at EPFL have started a company called Rayform to
make objects with customized caustics (both reflection and
refraction), using materials such as PMMA, aluminum, and glass to form
their “caustic generators”.  This turns out to be a centuries-old
Japanese art form known as "magic mirrors"; the originals were copper
mirrors hand-scraped to produce customized caustics under the
influence of copper's elasticity and a varying material thickness,
legendarily so that underground Japanese Christians could escape
religious persecution.
This prompted a couple of thoughts from
me tonight.  First, what about sunlight automicroscopy?  Second, how
about cheaper fabrication technology?

See also files `gauzy-shit` and `caustic-simulation`.

Sunlight automicroscopy
-----------------------

Sunlight reflecting off a convex surface projects a magnified image of
whatever colors or patterns are on the surface; this is easily seen
with, for example, a Red Bull can.  Sunlight is about 100 kilolux,
while sunlight shadows can vary but are typically around 3–10 kilolux.
So even if the reflected light is spread over a 20× larger surface
than the reflective convex object, it still has brightness comparable
to the ambient light.  And the projected image is substantially larger
than the patch on the surface that it is projected from — in the
aluminum-can case, all the spread is in a single dimension, so it can
be on the order of 20× larger, while the correspondingly bright
reflection from a sphere would have a linear magnification factor of
only 4–5 before becoming undesirably dim.

However, the caustic-shaping technique can potentially rescue the
method — in the geometrical-optics approximation with point-source
illumination, it can focus the light from an arbitrary area onto a
point or line of zero area, thus achieving infinitely bright
illumination.  Rayform’s demo videos seem to show focusing of more
than one order of magnitude.

Point-source light reflecting from a surface whose normal varies over
some angle θ will in turn vary over the angle 2θ.  The sun subtends
about half a degree, so the reflection from a curved surface patch
will subtend about half a degree more than the curved surface, which
blurs the projected image somewhat.  However, this is a limit on the
angular resolution of the microscopy method, not its spatial
resolution.  And narrowing the sunbeam by passing it through a pinhole
that subtends less than half a degree from the point of view of the
generator.

The nonzero angular size of the sun also provides the limit on the
brightness increase available by focusing: the projected focus spot
will have, at minimum, the same angular size as the sun, as viewed
from the point on the generator that is generating it.

Another limit on this technique is the diffraction limit: as the
concave facet producing the focused spot becomes smaller, the produced
beam has a larger divergence.  I think that roughly to achieve half a
degree divergence — the best you can do with a half-degree-wide sun
light source —  you need a facet of diameter roughly λ/(½sin(½°)).
This works out to about 126 μm for 550-nm light.  This *is* a spatial
resolution limit.

The facet can be a concave paraboloid section, in which case it
produces a point caustic, but if it is less concave in one direction,
it will spread out its light to produce a line caustic subtending some
arbitrary angle at some arbitrary rotation.

Setting the spatial and angular resolution limits equal, maybe we
would like 126 μm to subtend about ¼° of the curve of the convex
surface, which gives us a radius of about 29 mm.  Spheres or cylinders
with a diameter smaller than 58 mm will have an unnecessarily coarse
angular automicroscopy resolution limit, larger than ¼°, imposed by
diffraction of light from their facets; those with a larger diameter
will have an unnecessarily coarse spatial automicroscopy resolution
limit, larger than 126 μm, imposed by the apparent size of the sun.

If we want these 126 μm facets to project pixels at about
72dpi — 350 μm, a lower limit for comfortably readable text, although
older computer terminals and printers used a slightly coarser 8
vertical pixels per 6lpi line, giving 530 μm — then we want 350 μm to
subtend ½° as seen from the surface of the mirror.  This gives a
projection distance of 40 mm, which seems rather small to me, so maybe
100 mm would be better, which gives blurry 870-μm projections.  Since
each facet can project an arbitrarily oriented line, rather than just
a point, you only need about, say, 5 of them per letter.  This means
our 29-mm-radius shiny sphere with its 10500-mm² surface area, holding
about 850 000 facets of 0.0124 mm² each, can project about 170 000
letters, about 40 or 50 pages’ worth of text.

This may not be reasonable — the pixels may be too crowded together.
Consider that if the facets are all just directly pointed away from
the center, the spots they project will be ½° apart as seen from the
surface — which is to say, they will all kind of blur together, unless
you stack some of them on top of each other, which is of course what
Rayform does.

How bright are they by default?  Consider a mm² in the center of the
sunbeam, which is reflecting its light onto a screen in shadow
positioned a negligible angle to the side of it.  This mm² subtends 34
milliradians (1.98°) and so its projection will subtend 78 mrad
(4.0°), which means that at 100 mm it covers an area 6.9 mm × 6.9 mm,
which is 48 mm².  So it will be 48× dimmer than the direct sunlight:
2100 lux, visible on a 10 kilolux shadow background but far from
overwhelming.  But areas illuminated by several times this
126-micron-wide minimum will be considerably brighter than the shadow.

How much spatial precision do we need to make the surface reflect like
this?  Suppose we’re willing to tolerate ¼λ deviations.  Well, at
555 nm, that works out to 139 nm (≈ 5.5 micro-inches).  This is a
relative radius error of 4.8 parts per million.  Regular ABMA bearing
balls of grade 100 have a surface finish smoothness of
5.0 micro-inches (127 nm), but to get roundness of 5 micro-inches, you
have to go down to grade 5.  That isn’t even the lowest grade, but
grade-5 bearing balls don’t come as large as 58 mm; they only go up to
2 inches, which is 50.8 mm.

Turning a spherical surface with a radius of 29 mm into a
127-micron-wide paraboloidal facet with its focus at 100 mm requires
changing the curvature radius from +29 mm to -200 mm.  At +29 mm, the
middle of the facet would be 69 nanometers proud of planar; at
-200 mm, it would be 10 nm below.  This seems like I must have some
kind of calculation error, since it seems inconceivable for such a
small difference to produce a precise focus.

Cheaper fabrication technology
------------------------------

First off, what about using sugar glass instead of PMMA or soda-lime
glass for the refractive pieces?  Instead of polishing it with rouge,
you could polish it with water.

Second, how about using electropolishing to remove tiny, precisely
controlled amounts of metal, leaving a smoothly varying surface, while
leaving a mirror finish?  Electroplating at around 1000 A/m² deposits
chromium at something like 100 nm/minute, so it seems like thickness
control down to the level of less than a monolayer should be feasible.
This is also potentially useful for making large mirrors out of invar
or similar, then aluminizing or silvering them.
