Printed circuits on fired-clay ceramic
======================================

Suppose you want to fabricate a grid of wires, like for a capacitive
touchscreen.  In theory there are lots of ways you can do this:
etching or electroless plating of printed circuit boards (especially
including flex), weaving insulated wires (ideally multistranded) into
a flexible cloth, slicing aluminized mylar into ribbons and then
gluing the ribbons onto paper, drawing graphite lines on both sides of
a sheet of paper, etc., but I wanted to focus on the case of glazed
ceramic.

The basic touchpad design
-------------------------

Let’s say you start by making a bisque ceramic plate with a bunch of
narrow gold-leaf ribbons running in parallel across it.  Then you can
add an engobe or other glaze on top of those ribbons (except, perhaps,
along one edge where you are going to attach electrodes), then another
set of ribbons running across that, perpendicular to the first.  With
the proper choice of glaze, this new set of ribbons will be insulated
from the first set by the glaze.  If you then want them to be
insulated from the world, you can do a second glaze firing of the
plate with another, lower-melting glaze on top of the ribbons, again
with the possible exception of one edge.

This procedure should give you a grid of capacitively-coupled wires
whose coupling is dependent on you touching the plate.  This is also
potentially useful as a macroscopic ROM: if you add some conductive
paint to the surface at some junctions, it can act to increase the
capacitive coupling at those junctions, thus representing information.
Under suitable circumstances, this reader might even be able to
capacitively read heavy graphite marks on paper.

Concrete calculations
---------------------

Consider the case where each layer of glaze is 100 μm thick and has a
relative permittivity of 5 (that of glass — see file
`coffee-humidity-sensing`), the ribbons are 1 mm wide and 5 mm apart,
and you place a conductive circle of 11 mm in diameter over one of
these junctions.  The capacitance ε A / d between the wires without
the circle is 5 ε₀ 1 mm² / 100 μm = 0.44 pF, a capacitance small
enough to be hard to measure.  (ε₀, the vacuum permittivity, is about
8.85 picofarads / meter.)  The capacitance between the upper wire and
the circle is 5 ε₀ 11 mm² / 100 μm ≈ 4.9 pF, and the capacitance
between the lower wire and the circle is 5 ε₀ 11 mm² / 200 μm ≈
2.4 pF.  So the series capacitance between the two wires is 1.62 pF,
about four times larger than the capacitance without the conductive
thing.

Detecting an extra 1.2 pF in a circuit usually requires a relatively
carefully built measurement circuit to keep stray capacitances from
drifting, but it’s entirely feasible.  A thinner glaze or one with
higher permittivity, or wider ribbons, would provide larger
capacitances which would be even easier to measure; but wider ribbons
would also reduce the relative difference in capacitance between the
finger-present and finger-absent states.  A thicker glaze would
probably necessitate either high-permittivity ingredients or wider
ribbons.

At 10 MHz, which is a convenient frequency, 1.62 pF gives a capacitive
reactance of (2πfC)⁻¹ = 9.8 kΩ, while 0.44 pF gives 36 kΩ.  These
numbers are large compared to the expected resistance of the wires in
the plate: according to file `paper-foil-relays`, gold’s resistivity
is 2.44×10⁻⁸ Ωm, so a 1 mm × 100 nm × 100 mm wire is 24.4 Ω.  (See
file `spark-particulate-sieve` for information on metal thicknesses.)
But they are small compared to the input impedance of any random
op-amp.

Other conductors
----------------

Gold leaf has the advantages of being cheap and of not oxidizing, even
when ceramic is being fired.  (Most of the ceramic I’ve done was fired
at 1020° (see file `ceramics-notes`) but porcelain can be fired at up
to 1400°; some earthenware made from ferrous clay can be fired as low
as 600°.)  I have the impression that the usual pottery gilding
technique is somewhat more complicated than merely gluing gold leaf to
the greenware or bisqueware before a firing, but I’m not sure why.

Some oxides are also conductive; indium tin oxide is the one commonly
used for transparent conductors in LCDs, but zinc oxide and some heavy
metal titanates are also semiconductors.  Yttria-stabilized zirconia
is conductive at high enough temperatures, and was formerly used as an
incandescent element in Nernst lamps, and silicon carbide, though not
an oxide, oxidizes slowly enough to survive ceramic firing.  Some of
these might be practical to deposit on the surface as part of a glaze,
but I suspect that others would dissolve in the common glazes.

If you’re firing in a sufficiently reducing atmosphere, you may be
able to use powdered copper or copper oxide to get copper traces
rather than gold leaf; for uses like printed circuits, this could
offer immensely higher conductivity.  (Gold is very nearly as
conductive as copper, but gold’s cost advantage in this context would
come from being able to use a very thin layer of it, which gives it
substantial resistance.)  Carbon and many different metals might work
in a reducing atmosphere.

Applications other than touchpads and ROMs
------------------------------------------

Of course you can solder other components to the traces thus produced
and make a more or less conventional printed-circuit board, though
perhaps at somewhat higher cost.

The HP 9100 used a ROM design somewhat similar to the above, but using
inductive coupling rather than capacitive coupling, and using a
now-traditional multilayer printed-circuit board rather than layers of
ceramic glaze.  Such an inductive ROM could totally work, and
inductive sensing could also be used to detect the proximity of
ferromagnetic materials rather than conductive ones.

The traditional reason for applying gold leaf to thin sheets of
vitrified silicon dioxide was for a burglar alarm: the gold leaf
running around the outside of a glass window was part of a Wheatstone
bridge, and either breaking it along with the glass, or shorting it
out to avoid breaking it, would change its resistance enough to
trigger the alarm.  So you could use such embedded conductors for
detecting not only touch but also breakage.

The resistance calculated above for the gold-leaf traces is in a range
that would be usable for resistance heating, although common pottery
is somewhat fragile to thermal shock, so the heating would need to be
fairly slow.  (I suspect this can be improved in the body of the
pottery by foaming, but I don’t know how to improve it in the glaze.)
The gold itself will withstand fairly high temperatures.  Silicon
carbide and zirconia are other promising materials for printed
heaters.

An induction coil, for example for a pancake motor, can be printed on
a ceramic surface in this way.  If it’s to be used for high-power
applications like motors, cooking, or other bulk heating, rather than
sensing, you probably want the lower resistances achievable more
cheaply with copper.

Gold leaf’s extreme thinness could conceivably be used to fabricate
extremely fine circuit details, if you can pattern it finely enough.
For example, you could imagine traces of 100 nm thickness, as above,
but only 100 nm width rather than 1 mm, spaced 100 nm apart.  This
would provide 5 parallel conductors per micron, so a 10-mm-diameter
circle could contain a spiral pancake coil of 50’000 turns, which
would be a fairly sensitive detector of varying magnetic fields.

The (presumably) high resistance and high dielectric strength of the
glaze could enable electrostatic-like fields, perhaps capable of
moving macroscopic objects such as bits of aluminum foil.  According
to file `capacitance`, fused quartz doesn’t break down until 30 MV/m;
if the glaze is 10 MV/m, you could safely use voltages of up to about
1000 V with the 100-μm glaze thickness I guessed at above.

By exposing spark gaps on the surface of the plate, not placing glaze
over them, you could fabricate a kind of multiplexed matrix display.
Probably you could only illuminate one spark gap at a time, and you’d
probably need a few hundred volts to reliably get a spark going in
air.  Unlike conventional printed-circuit boards, glazed ceramic will
not become conductive when you arc across it (there’s nothing to char)
and the gases produced by the spark will not attack it; however, the
plasma will gradually vaporize it, and perhaps more importantly,
vaporize the spark-gap contacts, especially if they are thin gold
leaf.  Also, the device produces nitrogen oxides and ozone.

Since arcing produces substantial UV, you could possibly get pixels of
different colors by depositing different fluorescent colored dyes
under different spark gaps.

Selectively generating arcs as you sweep paper across the ceramic
could be used to selectively char the paper, thus printing on it,
though not in an archival-safe manner.

Glow/corona discharge in air might permit longer life than arcing.
Such spatially selective application of glow discharge in air could be
useful not only for making visible images with light but also for
selectively activating chemically-inert surfaces such as glass or
polyethylene, or selectively initiating polymerization or ozone
bleaching.

Glow discharge in a low-pressure inert-gas atmosphere, of course,
gives you a neon bulb.  I think that’s also how gas-plasma displays
work.

Such exposed pairs of contacts are also, of course, how rubber-dome
keyboards work, at lower voltages than those needed for spark gaps;
these can usually be operated by touching them with fingers as well.

Air-quartz flash bulbs are the gold standard for short non-laser light
pulses for high-speed photography; such a spark gap over
(largely-quartz) fired clay amounts to something similar to an
air-quartz flash bulb.  Aside from the uses in stroboscopy, an array
of such spark gaps firing in a raster sequence produces short flashes
of light emanating from different points; by focusing these through a
lens onto an object, they scan a spot of light across it in a fashion
similar to a flying-spot TV camera, but without moving parts.  The
resulting waveform of reflected light detected at some point P
produces an image of the scene as seen through the lens, as if
illuminated from point P.  (See file
`flying-spot-reilluminatable-stage` for more thoughts on this.)
