So, pulse radio, huh?

If you want to do short-range wireless communication among really
cheap circuits, maybe made out of garbage and running off batteries,
you could in theory use something like CW oscillations at some
arbitrary carrier frequency, like 101.3 MHz.  A Q=100 fixed-frequency
resonator circuit is relatively easy to build (three or four
components), will accumulate RF energy over some 100 oscillations, and
will allow you a modulation bandwidth of about 100 times less than the
carrier frequency, in this example 1MHz.  Then you could transmit
pulses using, say, Manchester encoding, and do clock and data recovery
in software.  Your filter circuit gives you some 20dB of rejection of
wideband noise like lightning and sparks and stuff.

This has a couple of big problems:

* 20dB isn't very much, so you have to use a lot of power.

* If you're using a single frequency, your signal will be easily
  picked up by accident by e.g. standard FM radios for listening to
  music.  This will provoke complaints if you happen to be close to a
  standard radio station.

* By the same token, if you're near a strong source of RF noise at a
  given frequency, such as a radio station, it will make it impossible
  to receive data.

* Even though it's easy to build a fixed-frequency resonator with
  Q=100, it's hard to tune its frequency to 1% precision, for thermal
  and fabrication-error reasons.  That means you'll have a hard time
  getting two such devices to communicate with each other without some
  kind of tuning component, like a varactor, unless you use something
  like a quartz crystal or a mechanical resonator for your filter.

Instead, you could build a low-Q resonator and transmit occasional
pulses spread across a wide band.  Here in ITU region 2, which
includes the Americas, we have a 902–928 MHz ISM band (Q=35) commonly
used for cordless phones, plus the 2.4–2.5 GHz ISM band (Q=25) also
used by Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, both of which have reasonable penetration
of building materials.

The lower your pulse rate, the less interference you'll cause with
other radio applications.  But now, instead of high-precision
resonators, you need high-precision clocks.  A common quartz clock
crystal oscillator has a precision of below 300ppm (I think 100ppm is
actually typical) but most of this error is due to temperature and
voltage variation.  If you can measure and compensate for the
temperature and voltage, producing a "temperature-compensated crystal
oscillator" ("TCXO") you can straightforwardly get precisions close to
1ppm.  If you're counting cycles with a microcontroller, increasing or
decreasing the cycle count is a simple way to compensate.

(You don't really need the resonator to make the communication work,
but it might help to prevent your generated RF interference from
straying outside the ISM band.)

If your average time between pulses is, say, 262144 clock cycles, then
you can transmit up to some 18 bits per pulse.  If your clock rate is
20MHz, easily achievable with off-the-shelf microcontrollers, you'll
be transmitting an average of 80 pulses per second, working out to a
maximum of 1.44 kilobits per second.  The 262144 is limited by the
precision of your clock speed; you need an oscillator with a precision
of 4ppm, which will require temperature compensation, to get such a
sparse pulse rate.

I think this is also the limit on your receiver selectivity --- those
18 bits have to be allocated between rejecting interference and
transmitting information.  You could get 50dB of receiver selectivity
at the cost of only transmitting one bit per pulse; or you could get
down to 3dB of receiver selectivity with the benefit of transmitting
17 bits per pulse.

I think it's reasonable to assume temperature compensation for the
duration of a communication; the transmitter can transmit a series of
pulses that allow the receiver to estimate the difference between
their two clocks.  A reasonable initiating pulse pattern for this
might include a series of exponentially-increasing intervals: first 2
clock cycles, then 3, then 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 24, 32, 48, 64, 96, 128,
192, 256, 384, 512, and so on, each pulse allowing the receiver to
more precisely calibrate their expectations for the timing of the next
pulse.  You don't even need to start at 2 cycles.  You could start at
whatever you think the worst-case clock-rate skew is likely to be.
Suppose you're reasonably sure your clocks are accurate to within
1000ppm, for example; then you could start with 512 cycles between
pulses and go up from there.

Because of the need for coding-gain receiver selectivity, I think you
probably need to transmit many more than 80 pulses per second to get a
reasonable data rate.  For example, if you transmit an average of 1024
pulses per second, a 16.777MHz clock gives you some 14 bits per pulse.
If you allocate 11 of these bits to receiver selectivity and use the
other 3 to encode information, you get three kilobits per second and
33dB receiver selectivity.  Your signal could in theory also be
rejected by some 30dB by someone using the same frequency band with
frequency-division multiplexing, but this will be limited by their
receiver Q.  If you're talking about a regular FM radio, I don't think
you're going to hit 30dB.

In a two-way communication, you could negotiate this allocation
dynamically, so that you get higher data rates when there's less
interference, in this case from fractional kilobits up to tens of
kilobits.

To improve rejection of narrowband interference, your receiver (but
not your transmitter) could be several concurrent channels handled by
different analog filters with slightly higher Q.  For example, you
could divide the 902–928MHz band (Q=35) into four bands of some 6MHz,
each handled by a separate Q=140 analog resonator.  Any single source
of narrowband interference will be limited to only one or two of these
four bands, and you can simply ignore that band when decoding.

You may even be able to get some of your frequency selectivity from
your antenna.  A 900MHz quarter-wave antenna is some 8.3 cm in length.
Unfortunately, I don't know how much selectivity you can get out of an
antenna.  Q=2, maybe?

Such cheap-shit electronics might often need to maintain very low
energy usage with extremely intermittent communication, for example in
mobile-sensor-network applications.  Achieving this probably requires
maintaining a very low duty cycle for the receiver circuit, which
effectively means you need some kind of time-domain multiplexing, with
each device only listening for transmissions to it inside of a narrow
time window.

Complicating this picture is the problem that the individual devices
may be radio-isolated from each other for long periods of time and
have clocks of limited accuracy, or even occasionally run out of
power.  If you want them to still be able to communicate when they
come in contact, one of them needs to happen to transmit at a time
when the other happens to have its receiver turned on.

A reasonable duty cycle for the receiver might be 1/1000 or so, if the
receiver needs 1000 times the idle power of the rest of the device.

If you can depend on clocks continuing to operate and on occasional
contact, then you can just use large timeslots.  For example, if your
worst-case clock drift is 15 seconds in a month, which is around what
you'd get from a watch crystal, and your worst-case delay between
resynchronization is a month, then each device can listen in a
designated 30-second interval.  With a duty cycle of 1/1000, the total
cycle will be about 8 hours.  So evidently this approach (which Elaine
Chao told me about; I don't know if she invented it) works fine for
wireless sensor networks that are relatively static, but it won't work
well in the dynamic-topology case, unless 8 hours is "dynamic".

Elaine's solution was that when a new device is joining an existing
network, it keeps its receiver turned on all the time until it
receives a beacon from an existing device, which lets it synchronize
with the network's timeslots.  This could work well if you have mobile
nodes with much higher available energy: they can listen constantly
for beacons from fixed low-power nodes announcing their listening
timeslots.

A different approach, suitable for a more symmetric system, is to
transmit beacons and listen at random.  Suppose we want a 10-second
average-case synchronization lag; then we need to arrange for the
transmitting node to transmit at the same time that the receiving node
is receiving, on average, every 10 seconds.  Suppose that the fastest
that you could notice that you might have received a beacon, and
therefore ought to keep listening to see if it's a new node you can
talk to, is 1 microsecond.  Now you have to coincidentally synchronize
with a probability of about 1 microsecond in 10 million microseconds.
If you listen a random 1/3000 of the time and the other node transmits
a beacon another random 1/3000 of the time, then once every 9 million
microseconds, you will happen to synchronize.

This implies, however, that you're transmitting 3333 beacons per
second, which is a lot, since the entire beacon frame will take a lot
more than a microsecond.  If you're willing to accept a longer
synchronization time, like 1000 seconds, then you can transmit only
333 beacons per second and listen 333 times per second.
