I was thinking about a zoomable, rotatable UI.  In this world, there’s
some “world space” in which the scene graph exists, and your screen is
an arbitrarily translated, rotated, and zoomed portal onto it,
considered as a linear function in complex numbers: y = mx + b, where
y is a point on the complex plane of world space, x is a point on the
complex plane of screen space, and m and b are complex numbers that
determine the translation, rotation, and zoom.

The world plane contains only one kind of object, which is mutable:
portals.

A *portal* is a circle through which another part of the world plane
is visible; like the screen, it consists of an (m, b) pair defining an
arbitrary translation, rotation, and zoom, this time from the world
plane onto itself.  However, it also has a *clipping circle*, defined
by a center and radius outside of which it is not visible, and a
*background color*, which is an RGBA color that it renders underneath
everything else seen through the portal.

Portals already existed (with that name) in Pad++ decades ago; in this
system there are four differences:

- they are round, not rectangular;
- they can rotate as well as zooming;
- nothing else exists;
- they have a background color.

There is a total order among portals in the world plane, with portals
earlier in the order being “painted on top of” portals later in the
order.  This may or may not result in the later portal being invisible
because it’s been obscured by an opaque background color.

Optimizations
-------------

Given the necessity to sample the world plane at pixel coordinates,
you can do strength-reduction of the pixel-scanning operation; if Δx
is the coordinate difference between pixels on the same row, you can
compute mΔx and scan the pixels on the row by repeatedly adding that.

To keep drawing quick, it’s probably necessary to dynamically compute
some kind of bounding volume hierarchy, which could be made out of
circles or not.

As you move scan line by scan line down the image, you can use the
midpoint algorithm (which incrementally updates an error accumulator
x² + y² - r² as it changes x and y to walk along the circle) to
incrementally adjust the start point of each circle.

You can cache parts of the world plane rasterized at some resolution,
downsampling from there.  However, it may be tricky to propagate
updates.

Making things with it
---------------------

First, of course, you can draw things by putting opaque portals on top
of or next to each other.  Those portals don’t need to view anything
in particular.  At its simplest, you can use opaque black circles all
of the same size as if they were dot-matrix pixels, but you can also
overlap a bunch of portals (either translucent or of different colors)
to get a gradient, for example, or use two concentric circles of
different colors and slightly different radii to get a curved line of
some thickness.

Once you have a picture somewhere, you can add portals to it elsewhere
in order to use it in more places.  Changes you make to the original
picture will be reflected in each of the copies.  For example, you
could draw a letter “C” in one place, add a portal to it, and add a
crossbar on top of the portal, transforming it into a “G”.  Further
modifications you make to the “C” — adding a serif, for example — will
be reflected in the “G”.  If you draw glyphs for the letters "e", "t",
"o", and "n", you can set up a series of portals to those letters to
spell phrases like “no note on teen tenon tent to neon noon onto no
tone”.  The rendering of the phrase will automatically reflect
whatever changes you make to the original letterforms.

Furthermore, you can make a portal for a whole set of such pictures,
such as an entire monospaced font, and use portals onto that portal to
pull out individual letterforms.  Then, if you redirect the portal to
a different set of pictures, you have achieved a change of font.  You
could even have an area with several different font variants, such as
plain, bold, italic, and bold-italic.

This works for monospaced fonts that don’t differ too much in aspect
ratio, and for proportional fonts that share the same font metrics,
but it won’t work very well for changing fonts between fonts with
different metrics, including often changing between the plain and bold
versions of the same font.

(You can make a crudely bolded version of such a font by making two
overlapping portals to it that are shifted by less than a linewidth,
thus thickening its lines.)

By putting portals within their own target, you can automatically
generate fractals — which of course implies that the rendering code
needs to handle infinite recursion gracefully.

User interface interaction techniques thus enabled
--------------------------------------------------

Since everything you see on the screen is a portal to “somewhere
else”, you can provide a command to jump to that other place, at which
point you can zoom in or out as you wish.  And you can add such a
portal from anywhere to anywhere.

More commonly, you’d like to zoom in to look at a particular portal,
without jumping through the portal.  This should help a lot with the
problem ZUIs have with constrained pixel displays, where things are
almost always either too big or too small.

Conversely, you can display a set of “backlinks” to a place that are
visual thumbnails in context of places that have a portal overlapping
that place.

Because everything is a portal, in addition to jumping through it or
moving it around, you can also drive it around the space it views,
zooming, panning, and rotating.

Probably the usual way of making a new portal should be cloning an
existing portal, after which you can start to make changes to it.

Minimal interactions necessary to use it
----------------------------------------

There are only a few basic actions:

- creating new portals;
- deleting portals;
- changing the background color of a portal;
- changing where a portal looks (its destination point, zoom, and
  rotation);
- changing where a portal appears (its location and radius).

For minimality of mechanism, the viewport portal should not require
specially-implemented commands for it.  It’s just that deleting it or
changing where it appears are inapplicable operations.

The usual map navigation actions are panning and zooming, and panning
usually results from left-mouse dragging or finger-dragging.  It would
maybe be kind of unfortunate if left-mouse dragging did something to
change the world, but of course that kind of conflicts with the desire
for the viewport portal not to be special...

You might be able to get by with only jump-to rather than free panning
and zooming: click on a portal to make it mostly fill your viewport.
But that really only works for the viewport portal.  Ideally (for
minimality of mechanism) the viewport portal would be much like any
other portal.

So that means that jump-to takes two different portals as arguments:
the jump destination and the thing you want to cause to point at it
(your “focus portal”).

Even telling what you’re clicking on may be a little tricky, since you
can be looking at a portal that is viewing a zoomed-in view of another
portal which is zoomed into a third portal, etc.

Practically speaking, you probably need to be able to copy portals so
that you can make modified versions of them.  But you can have two
kinds of “copy relationships” between portals: a portal can simply be
a view of another portal, or it can be a clone of it.  It might make
sense to start with a “create a view” command and then possibly later
convert that into a “make a copy of the viewed scene”.

At some point it may also be useful to push objects through a portal.

I’m thinking that probably when you click (or double-click?) on a
portal a halo of buttons should appear around it offering you
different options: one to change its size, one to move it around where
it is displayed, one to delete it.  Probably zooming and panning the
selected portal should just be the usual mouse drag and scroll i

Prototyping
-----------

I’ve talked above a bit about techniques that might be useful for an
efficient implementation of this system.

However, it should be possible to hack together a *simple*
implementation of the system, enough to play with, much more
easily... and so I spent a couple of hours on that in DHTML with
`<canvas>`.

Real-time responsiveness
------------------------

In the form described above, it’s possible to require an arbitrary
amount of computation per pixel; in fact, if the pixel happens to be a
fixed point of a portal transformation, the amount is theoretically
infinite.  This is intolerable for real-time user interface
responsiveness.

To avoid this problem, I propose that we render portals each frame not
from their *current* contents but from their *previous* contents,
cached as a raster image from the previous frame.  If no previous
contents are available, use some placeholder texture that’s easy to
compute.

In the absence of alpha-compositing, this would guarantee that it’s
possible to calculate the screen image each frame with a single
texture sample per screen pixel, plus some increment of work in
updating offscreen texture buffers; if this increment is small,
updates might take many frames to settle, while if it is large, they
should settle quickly.  This background increment itself has the same
real-time pixel bound as the screen update.  Normally you would expect
the increment to be many times the size of the screen.  For example,
the VideoCore IV used in the Raspberry Pi claims a fill rate of a
gigapixel per second, but only 2.1 megapixels of output screen
resolution at most (and only one megapixel by default), so it should
be able to compute almost seven screenfuls of offscreen texture
updates per frame in the worst case.

To guarantee real-time responsiveness in the presence of
alpha-compositing, partially-alpha-composited images should also be
cached.  Ideally you'd do this front-to-back, inverse-painter’s-
algorithm style.

Finally, it makes sense to schedule this offscreen texture updating to
happen *before* the screen is painted rather than after, so that
you’ll only see lag in the case where there’s more work to be done
than can actually be done in a single frame time.
