I’m doing some stuff in the ceramics lab, with the objective being to
construct a self-replicating micromachine.  I have four key objectives
to achieve this:

1. Full recursion: do the entire fabrication process, from separation
   to firing and assembly, using entirely components that can be
   fabricated with that process.  Alternatively, if this objective is
   misguided (perhaps using metals, glasses, plaster, or plastics
   would be more reasonable), I want to discover that.

2. Material properties characterization, simulation, and optimization:
    I want to have quantitative measurements of the main physical
    properties of the material in both green and fired states.  In
    particular:

    1. Tensile strength and modulus.
    2. Shear strength and modulus.
    3. Density.
    4. Thermal expansion.
    5. Separately, fracture resistance, even though that can in
       theory be predicted from the other properties.
    6. Abrasion resistance.
    7. Dependences of these on relevant process parameters.
    8. Heat resistance (e.g. maximum service temperature,
       softening point if any, sintering point, melting point,
       perhaps variation of other properties with temperature
       below the softening point).
    9. Creep, plastic deformation, and related complications;
       although I expect these will be very low for fired clay
       ware, plastic deformation is an enormously important
       process for shaping wet clay, which can have almost zero
       elastic deformation and creep but enormous plastic
       elongation.

    Given an adequate numerical characterization of the materials’
    properties, simulation of its behavior under different
    circumstances should become possible; by running a series of such
    simulations with different designs and performing error and
    differentiation analyses on the simulations, a substantial degree
    of automation in design should become possible.  If the simulation
    performs adequately, it should be possible to run such
    optimization processes during the fabrication process in order to
    automatically improvise responses to newly available information.

    With the first two of these items, I can do FEA analyses and
    optimizations for static loading; with the third, I can do dynamic
    loading as well.  The others are useful for particular cases.

3. Generation-time reduction by process intensification: I predict
   that the primary figure of quality for self-replicating machinery
   will be its mass growth rate, which needs to exceed the IRR of
   available investments in order to be economic, and which is an
   exponential function of the generation time.

4. Miniaturization: somewhat secondary to the above three
   considerations, smaller is better.  This is largely a means to an
   end: thinner walls will dry faster and fire faster (up to a point),
   linearly smaller machinery will have a proportionally shorter
   generation time, and the demands its mass places on its mechanical
   properties will be proportionally smaller, both permitting more
   geometrical freedom and simplifying calculations.  Miniaturization
   also helps with safety and cost of materials and energy.  However,
   miniaturization has limits: it requires more precise manipulation
   and measurement, surface effects like stiction and sliding wear
   become more serious concerns, and in particular thermal processes
   like firing pottery become more difficult to complete at smaller
   scales.

