It’s straightforward for a Unix process to spawn a child and then
clean up when the child exits — it can use the wait(2) system call to
sleep until the child is done.  For things like changing the video
mode, turning off cursor display and character echo in a Unix
terminal, turning on power to a heating element, and so on, this is an
improvement over the usual approach of doing the cleanup in the same
process, because it happens even if the supervised process crashes,
for example because of an OOM kill or a segfault.  This requires that
the supervisor process be less likely to crash, but that is often easy
to arrange; an effective supervisor for particular scenarios can be
written in ten or twenty lines of C.

This is such an effective way to handle errors that systems designed
for high-reliability applications, such as Erlang, often use it as
their only way to handle errors.

However, it’s a problem for the adoptability of a C library if using
it requires its users to launch their programs in a special way.  So
another possible approach is to spawn a supervisor *child* which waits
for the parent to die.  Unix doesn’t have a general way to wait for
non-child processes to die, but this can be taken care of easily with
a pipe from the supervised parent to the supervisor child — the parent
can trigger a cleanup either by writing a byte to the child or by
exiting, including by way of an OOM kill.

The supervisor child is not entirely transparent to the application,
for two reasons.

First, if you have no children, wait(2) or waitpid(2) with a -1 PID
will return immediately with ECHILD; the supervisor child would
convert this into a deadlock, as each of the child and the parent are
waiting for the other to exit.  This can be fixed with the double-fork
trick usually used to spawn daemons.

Second, and more seriously, POSIX threads are pretty aggressively
incompatible with fork(); it’s unsafe, at least in theory, to call
things like ioctl() in the forked child if the parent is
multithreaded, presumably because ioctl() might try to acquire a lock
that was held by another thread at fork time, a thread which doesn’t
exist in the child and which therefore can’t unlock its lock.  To work
around this — and also perhaps to reduce memory consumption and the
likelihood of OOM kills — the supervisor child could exec() a
special-purpose supervisor executable.
