Suppose we have a non-stack-oriented VM intended for dense code; now
maybe we can afford 16-bit instruction words (instead of Smalltalk’s
8) because we don’t need to spend half our words on stack manipulation
and fetching local variables.  We can avoid three-address instruction
formats in a few different ways; the most appealing is to use
something like the Mill’s Belt for instruction results.

In particular, I think that the usual instruction format could
probably have two operands, and I think that part of the namespace of
operands should be devoted to the belt, while another part should be
devoted to a traditional set of normal registers, handled perhaps in
the usual way; perhaps you’d have 8 belt registers and 8 normal
registers.  As an alternative to handling them in the usual way, each
function could have its own set of registers, or you could use
rotating windows like the SPARC.

The Smalltalk VM additionally has a bunch of implicit context that
goes with a method execution: you implicitly have the object’s
instance variables mapped into your bytecode namespace, and the method
is associated with a vector of method selectors that it can invoke
with its bytecodes.  This may save space in the bytecode, although for
the indirection to pay for itself, you probably need several methods
to share the same vector.

If we take a more traditional approach, we could pack two 12-bit
instructions into a 24-bit word in the usual case, or three 11-bit
instructions into a 32-bit word (with one bit omitted).  This gives us
three or four bits of opcode plus 4 bits per operand.  A special tag
bit could indicate a 23-bit or 31-bit literal, at the cost of making
half the opcodes (or operands) illegal in a given position.  (Literals
go onto the belt.)

If we estimate that each of these VM instructions are roughly
equivalent to two stack-bytecode instructions, then we are getting 1⅓
to 1½ times the standard Smalltalk bytecode density, which is already
world-beating.  Then there’s just the issue of what those 8 or 16
opcodes should do, exactly.

(Alternatively, we could pack two 16-bit instructions into a 32-bit
word, leaving us a very generous 6 bits for the opcode and 5 for each
operand, or 4 bits for the opcode and an even more generous 6 for each
operand.  This is just the same instruction density as Smalltalk.)

We at least need to be able to do arithmetic, load and store values
into registers, and do conditional jumps, or at least conditional
returns.

Probably at least one of the opcodes would do well to invoke a
method/“send a message”.  Smalltalk lumps arithmetic and array access
into this, too: if the object you’re sending the message to happens to
be a number, and the message is an arithmetic message, then it does
arithmetic; if it’s an array, and the message is an array element
access message, then it accesses array elements.