By using a fairly rigid aperture grille with sparse randomly placed
holes of different sizes, including a large number that are very
small, it should be possible to do very high resolution microscopy,
including subwavelength near-field light microscopy of flat objects,
using only low-resolution, low-quality lenses or mirrors to focus
light.

You put the grille on top of the sample, in contact with it, and shine
light through the sample and the grille, taking a picture of the
starfield pattern that comes through.  Where a hole is over a clear
spot in the sample, a white point of light will show; where it’s over
a transparent red spot, a red point of light will show; where it’s
over an opaque part, no light will show.  The holes are much smaller
than the camera pixels, but they are sparse enough that typically only
one hole or less makes a significant contribution to each camera
pixel.  The consequence is that moving the grille by a hole diameter
or so scans many such high-resolution pixels over the sample, and by
taking many such frames, eventually the whole sample can be covered
redundantly by many holes.

It’s necessary to estimate the relative positions of the holes to deep
subpixel resolution, and it may be necessary to do this simultaneously
with estimating the image of the surface, a problem similar to the
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) problem in robotics.
Alternatively, if the grille is rigid enough, it may be possible to
estimate the hole positions ahead of time, using, for example, a known
microscopic image or many high-resolution photographs of the grille.

Using a variety of different sizes of holes in such a grille is a way
to reduce the difficulty of this estimation problem.  The larger holes
provide a blurrier image, but their positions are much easier to
estimate to the desired precision, and the blurry image helps in
estimating the position of the smaller holes.

A very practical way to produce such a grille is by perforating a thin
metal surface, such as gold leaf; aluminum foil peeled from a gum
wrapper; the aluminum coating on metallized Mylar/boPET or polyimide,
such as a discarded potato chip bag; or the silvering of a
first-surface mirror.  A very practical way to perforate such a metal
sheet is with a short-lived arc, triggered by bringing an electrode
close to the surface; the hole diameter, if not its position, can be
controlled fairly precisely by controlling the energy released in the
arc, which can be measured fairly precisely by measuring the charge
and voltage loaded onto a capacitor before the discharge.

Gold leaf is typically 0.2 microns thick; Mylar is commonly 10 microns
thick, but only about 0.5 microns of that is the metallized film,
sometimes as little as 0.1 microns.  Regular kitchen aluminum foil is
on the order of 20 microns thick.  Vaporizing a 1-micron-diameter hole
in an 0.5-micron-thick metal film requires vaporizing about 0.4 (μm)³
of metal, which at 2.7 g/cc for aluminum works out to about a
picogram.  Solid aluminum's specific heat is 24.20 J/mol/K, its heat
of fusion is 10.71 kJ/mol, its heat of vaporization is 284 kJ/mol, and
it boils at 2470°, so we're looking at (2470 - 20) K 24.20 J/mol/K +
10.71 kJ/mol + 284 kJ/mol = 354 kJ/mol, and its atomic weight is about
27.0 g/mol, so that’s 14 kJ/g = 14 nJ/pg = 14 nJ per hole.  That’s the
energy of a 280 pF capacitor at 10 V.

If the capacitor’s capacitance were to increase or decrease by 1% (for
example due to temperature, ferroelectric, or soak effects), which is
a typical precision for low-capacitance capacitors like this, that
would increase or decrease the diameter of the hole by about ½%.  It
should be straightforward to measure the charge deposited on the
capacitor during the charging process to within about 0.1%.

I say it’s probably not practical to control the location of the hole
precisely because you need to bring the electrode close enough to the
foil to provoke a dielectric breakdown of the air; for 10 V to be
adequate, for example, the distance needs to be about 3 microns.  But
if the tip has a spherical radius of 3 microns, then a corona
discharge will be occurring around the tip at the same time.  This
seems undesirable to me for a variety of reasons (uncontrolled loss of
energy, ionic erosion) so it would be better to make the tip diameter
much larger than this.  But this means that the position of the arc
will be uncertain to within several microns, controlled by small
asperities on the tip or on the foil or by stray ions that wander by.
You’re depending on the positive feedback of the arc itself to channel
all the energy into a small area, but that same positive feedback
creates unpredictability.

Using lower voltages would help if it were possible, but it probably
is not practical; Paschen’s law has its minimum for nitrogen at about
one torr cm and about 300 V.  An atmosphere is 760 torr, so we reach
one torr cm at about 13 microns.  Using higher voltages makes the
lateral uncertainty larger.

XXX now that I know about Paschen’s law I need to rethink the above
for a higher voltage.

Coloring the grille black, for example with a layer of carbon black
deposited by smoke, should reduce stray light contamination which will
damage SNR and require algorithmic rejection after the fact.  This
should be especially helpful for imaging using reflected light rather
than transmitted light.

This approach doesn’t seem like it would offer any advantages for
electron microscopy, and without very exotic materials, it probably
doesn’t extend very far into the ultraviolet.

Doing telescopy rather than microscopy with this approach probably
will not work very well, because diffracting light through small holes
like that will lose a lot of information about which direction it came
from.  But in telescopy, the whole point is to determine which
direction it came from.  A more purely diffractive approach, where the
incoming light diffracts through a random aperture grille and then
falls on a focal plane with no intervening lens, might work better.
