Constant-space grep
===================

Grep reads an input file consisting of arbitrary-sized lines and
outputs those lines which contain a given pattern.  Related utilities
like mboxgrep and glimpse do a similar job.  One thing they all have
in common is that when they reach the beginning of a new line (or
other record), they do not yet know whether that line will be output
or discarded; and they may not know until reaching the end of the
line.

Two simple approaches to this problem are to limit line length and to
allocate memory dynamically.  Limiting line length is practical, but
the arbitrary limit produces problems later on when you run into it.
Allocating memory dynamically is also practical, but can use
arbitrarily large amounts of memory.

But the problem can be solved in constant space, for different kinds
of constant space, with different degradations of the usual grep
features.

Sequential-access read-only rewindable input
--------------------------------------------

If your only writable memory is small, but the input file is stored
and seekable, the best you can do is to keep track of how many bytes
you are into the current line, and rewind the input back to the
beginning of the line (“record”) when you find a match.  This
requires, in the worst case, one seek for every record in the input
file, and two reads of every byte.

If the input file isn't even stored, grep is impossible, because
computing the first output line can require an arbitrarily large
amount of data to be stored.

Two sequential-access bidirectional temporary files
---------------------------------------------------

With two tape drives, you can solve the grep problem as follows,
although you lose grep's normal pipeline promptness.  Each record from
the input is copied into a temporary file T1, followed by its length
and a boolean carefully whether it contains a match or not.  Then, we
read T1 backwards, copying the matching records (in reverse order)
onto a second temporary file T2.  Since we're reading it backwards, we
read the boolean before each record, so we know whether to copy it or
not.  Finally, we read T2 backwards, copying its contents to the
output.

Under some circumstances, the file T2 itself (the backwards grep
output) might be adequate as output to the next stage; in those cases,
we can make do with a single sequential-access bidirectional temporary
file.

Two sequential-access unidirectional temporary files
----------------------------------------------------

In this case, we copy the input records into a temporary file T1,
while writing match booleans to a second, much smaller, temporary file
T2.  Then, we rewind both and read them sequentially and in parallel,
using the match booleans from T2 to tell us which records to output
from T1.
