In designing simplified computing systems for bootstrapping, one of
the problems is that even once you have built a CPU and RAM, you still
somehow need to bootstrap useful software into the thing.  At one
point this was usually done by entering an “IPL” or “bootstrap”
program into the memory one bit at a time using switches, then making
the CPU run, but this requires the electronic interface to the CPU and
RAM to support such direct manipulation, which complicates it
somewhat.  Also, it’s a terrible user interface.

Somewhat later, machines came with a “monitor program” in ROM, which
would use the usual I/O mechanisms to interact with a user and allow
them to enter the IPL program using, say, a hexadecimal keypad.  The
Heathkit H8 was an 8080-based computer that worked in this way.  The
later H89, which was a miniaturized Z80-based H8 built into an H19
terminal, substituted a terminal-based monitor program.  Other PCs of
the era were less slavish followers of the minicomputer tradition and
typically had Microsoft BASIC in ROM, and would run that initially,
sometimes giving you the option to use it to load other binary
software from other media.

However, all of these alternatives involve a fairly large amount of
ROM and RAM: tens of thousands of bits, if not more.  An amount that
would take an unreasonable amount of time to solder together out of
individual transistors, let’s say.

The HP 9100A took a different approach that didn’t require a lot of
ROM (well, except the 32-kilobit microcode!) or RAM.  It was sold as a
calculator, a forerunner of HP’s later popular line of electronic
pocket calculators (beginning with the HP-35), but it was in fact a
programmable computer, just with a very small amount of read-write
memory: each of its 19 registers was 14 6-bit-wide BCD digits, for
1596 total register bits.  This is a very small amount of memory, but
the 9100A took full advantage of it by using a 6-bit instruction set,
thus supporting programs up to 266 instructions long.  (I think.
Maybe you couldn’t store program steps in the X, Y, and Z registers.
Certainly it wouldn’t be very useful to do so.)

The more interesting thing about this is that the HP 9100A’s
instruction set was in fact its keyboard: each keystroke, more or
less, executed a CPU instruction.  This, plus a simple mode for
storing a sequence of keystrokes in memory and an instruction set
tailored to support use as a user interface, allowed it to survive
without a ROM monitor.

(Unfortunately, both its keyboard and its display were tightly coupled
to its processor; there was no mode that allowed a program to
interactively process keyboard input, as opposed to processing data
entered into memory before it was started, or to display data of its
choice on the display.)

This might turn out to be a useful way to simplify bootstrapping a
computer: rather than toggle data into its memory with a direct
front-panel memory interface, and then providing it with a RUN/STOP
switch and a single-step switch so that you can debug it, you can feed
it instructions directly, letting the CPU interact with memory on your
behalf.

One possible GreenArrays-like way to do this is to memory-map the
keyboard, don’t increment the program counter when executing from the
memory-mapped part of the address space, and make the standard
interactive keyboard-read address blocking, so the CPU halts execution
until you send it a keystroke.  (You could additionally provide a
nonblocking-read location or an is-keystroke-ready location.)  This
still requires hardware to automatically display CPU registers while
the CPU is halted on keyboard input in order to be useful, as well as
probably some kind of interrupt to send execution back to the
keyboard-read address on manual program cancellation or detected
program trap.

I suspect that all of that requires less transistors than a ROM
monitor routine!

My current Calculus Vaporis design would not be very usable in such a
scheme.  Its seven instructions are $, ., -, |, @, !, and nop, of
which $ is the biggest problem.

$ includes an entire 11-bit immediate constant.  You could replace it
with eight separate instructions 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, each of
which shifts the accumulator left by three bits and ORs the
appropriate octal digit in.  This could almost allow you to use
four-bit instructions, which could be packed three per 12-bit word;
the other 6 instructions would use 6 of the other 8 opcodes.  9 bits
of immediate constant per 12-bit word is very nearly as good as 11
bits, although it would take three times as many cycles; also, you’d
get the benefit of much denser other instructions.

This would also require a separate PUSH or DUP instruction to achieve
the function currently provided by $ of getting a second item onto the
stack.  A PUSH0 instruction is probably the best way to do this.

However, the rest of the instruction set is not very usable as it is;
it lacks unconditional calls or jumps as well as addition (it has
subtraction) and bitwise operations other than NAND (|).  All three of
these are problems in practice for writing programs for it.

Expanding to a 5-bit instruction set, of which half could still be
hexadecimal digits, would provide room for 8 bits of constant in a
12-bit word and also provide instruction encoding space for some of
those other operations.  (I’d vote for unconditional jump-and-link,
addition, NOT, and AND, at least.)  It’s clear that there’s a strong
tension between usability and hardware simplicity in this context.  A
separate return stack would permit passing arguments to subroutines on
the stack; a third parameter stack register, as on the 9100A, would
allow the evaluation of nested expressions without an intermediate
store to memory; and so on.

The “dontmove” design I’ve been playing with as an archival virtual
machine may be an interesting alternative.  Instead of a stack with
different instructions to perform different ALU outputs, dontmove is
nearly a MOV machine — except that the load and store parts of the MOV
are done in separate instructions.  It has 26 immediately-accessible
registers, named with the Latin letters, and 52 instructions that load
and store them from its single temporary register.  Of these, five are
memory-mapped magic: Aa is byte I/O, Bb is a subtractor, Cc and Dd are
a PIC-like indirect access and its pointer, and Ee is the program
counter.  (Writing to it magically saves the return address in the
temporary register, so it’s a jump-and-link.).  Then you have ten more
instructions to multiply the temporary register by 10 and add a
decimal digit to it.  Conditional jumps are obtained by setting Dd to
4 (Ee) or to somewhere else (such as Ff, which is just a normal
location), then storing into Cc.

I suspect that such a machine could be roughly as simple as Calculus
Vaporis, but perhaps more amenable to interactive instruction entry at
the extremely low levels of complexity we’re talking about.