I think our only real hope for survival and prosperity is learning to
cooperate nonviolently — not just without violence and threats in
day-to-day life, but without even condoning state violence such as
war, arrests, and imprisonment.  Historically, state violence has been
far from sufficient to organize society; society's functioning rested
primarily on nonviolent day-to-day interactions, what Gandhi called
satyagraha, primarily between people who know each other in small
communities.

Mostly starting in the 20th century, although with antecedents in
historical episodes like the Roman Dominate, we've seen a dangerous
set of experiments in organizing society primarily around the state,
which is to say around violence.  While these experiments have
produced some promising results (the extermination of polio, space
travel, dramatically improved agricultural yields, the internet) I
hope we can move beyond them to a peer-to-peer global society.
Otherwise, it seems that we are doomed either to live under a global
state — which we can hope against hope will not be particularly
despotic — or perish in a nuclear holocaust or similar tragedy.

Violence, Warfare, and Agriculture
----------------------------------

Nevertheless, it remains true that through most of history, we've been
under the threat of violence from other communities.  Warfare and
warriors have been a constant plague on humanity since prehistory, and
historically, we have had no hope of living without violence, only of
prevailing in it.

And, historically, this violence has been mostly two-dimensional:
warfare and warriors moved around on the ground.  This gives rise to a
minimal stable size for an agricultural settlement, because the
circumference of a two-dimensional shape increases more slowly than
its area as the shape grows.

A farmer cannot defend his own field from looters, armed or otherwise.
It might require 100m² or 1000m² of land to feed one farmer, depending
on the climate, your cultivars, your ability to trade, and so on; but
even 100m² of land has a minimal circumference of some 35 meters.  One
farmer might be able to defend one or two or ten meters of
circumference, even while he's awake, but not 35.

But a circle with a circumference of 70 meters has an area of 400m²,
enough to feed, hypothetically, four farmers.  That leaves each of
them only needing to defend 18 meters of circumference instead of 35.
Still too much, but perhaps moving in the right direction.

If each farmer can defend ten meters, your minimal size is almost
twice that, or 130 meters of circumference, and 13 farmers, with their
wagons or houses circled in a 20-meter circle around 1300m² of land.

If each farmer can defend two meters of circumference, you have 315
farmers on a circle 200 meters across with a total area of 31500
square meters, about three city blocks, three hectares, or eight
acres.  This is beyond Dunbar's Number, and so at this point you start
needing institutions, formal hierarchy, and so on.  Two meters is
small enough that you can have night sentries who wake everybody else
up if they see or hear anything, and dense enough that you can't steal
the farmers' crops by yourself — you need a raid by an armed and
organized band of bandits.

100m² is a really small farm.  It's not enough to support a person
except in the most fertile parts of the world, with a lot of luck.
1500m² might be a more realistic estimate in most of the world.  If
you need 1500m² per person, but each person can defend only five
meters, your minimum community size is 754 farmers, 600 meters across,
with an area of a million square meters (100 hectares).

Of course, in real life, the farmers don't live on the outer borders
of the farmland; they only go there when there's a raid or the threat
of a raid from another tribe, and they keep what is most precious to
them — their lives and those of their families — in a much smaller
area that's easier to defend than their entire fields.  But there
still need to be enough of them to keep a watch on the border, and to
repel the raiders when they raid.

The Origin of Stratification
----------------------------

I think this is why the birth of agriculture led to the stratification
of society.  It's not, as many have said, that agriculture makes it
possible, for the first time, to produce enough surplus to support a
richer class; observations of contemporary hunter-gatherers show that,
even though they're living on the most marginal lands, they still only
work for survival a small amount of the time.  And it's not just that
agriculture makes you store up your harvest in a granary where it can
be stolen.  It's that keeping hunter-gatherers from gathering what's
in your field requires you to organize into groups that are bigger
than Dunbar's Number, and the more organized the hunter-gatherers or
pastoralists or invading agriculturalists are, the bigger your
community needs to be to repel them — even at the cost of enabling
parasitic warrior-kings.

To put it more plainly, in such a world, if your farmers aren't
willing to die for the sake of people they don't really know, if they
aren't willing to sacrifice their lives for an abstraction, if they
aren't willing to be sent to their deaths by a general, then raiders
will take their food and their children will starve.  But the general
or king who chooses who to send to their death will not send his own
sons first, and if you do not pay him tribute, he can send his loyal
subjects to take it from you by force.  So stratification is born.

If this explanation holds water, we'd expect to see:

1. Proportionally smaller states and less social stratification in
   areas and time periods with higher natural agricultural
   productivity.
2. Larger states and more stratification in areas with more forceful
   raiders.

I think these do exist, although I'm not sure — many enormous empires
with great stratification have surely existed in very fertile places.

(The explicatory power of this area-to-perimeter ratio thing is
perhaps somewhat dubious: surely in most of history the greatest
determinant of the size of any given state has been the size of
neighboring states, no?)

What about new technology?

Vat food
--------

People only need to eat 100–120W of food, or 2000–2500kcal/day, and
the solar resource in most of the world is greater than that per
square meter — in the US, it's mostly 3–6kWh/day/m², which is
120–250W/m².  The reason you need hundreds or thousands of square
meters per person for agriculture is that, first, natural
photosynthesis is only about 3% efficient even when not
resource-limited; second, plants spend most of their energy on growth
and reproduction, not on feeding you; and, of course, you need
micronutrients.

But what if you had a 60%-efficient electric solar collector, powering
a 30%-efficient synthetic sugar-and-protein plant?  Then you could
turn 18% of the sunlight you caught into edible calories.  If you had
access to a 250W/m² solar resource, you could get by on 2⅔m².
Remember how, before, the need for one defending farmer per five
meters of perimeter forced the farmers to band together into groups of
754?  Now you can get that same level of security with 2 "farmers"
guarding a 1.3-meter-diameter circle.  You don't hit Dunbar's Number
until you have 135 "farmers" guarding their shared 10.7-meter-across
solar plant, half a meter apart.

One person per 2⅔m² is about 370 000 people per square kilometer,
which is more than ten times the density of the densest cities in the
world, such as Delhi, or Manhattan, or Friendship Village, Maryland.

That is, people eating synthetic macronutrients out of vats could
establish population densities that exceed the population densities of
our current agriculture-based society by as huge a ratio as ours
exceeded the density of the pastoralist and hunter-gatherer societies
it has defeated.  And, perhaps, they would have no need to establish
hierarchical states with unaccountable rulers, simply in order to be
able to protect their crops from raids; they could do it with tribes
of hunter-gatherer scale.

None of this is quite feasible yet, neither 50%-efficient solar-energy
collection (the current state of the art is about 40%, or 5% at the
lowest cost per watt) nor efficient macronutrient synthesis.  However,
they're both clearly technically achievable.

(You might think that it would be pretty uncomfortable to have only 2⅔
m², 29 square feet, per person, like hanging out in a crowded
supermarket for your entire life; but you could build buildings many
stories tall, to provide each person with ample living space.)

(Another caveat: as Charlie Manson, David Koresh, and the like have
amply demonstrated, living in a hunter-gatherer-sized autonomous band
is no guarantee of living in peace or hunter-gatherer-like
egalitarianism.)

The United States contains 9.8 million km².  If it were populated at
370k people/km², it would contain 3.6 trillion people, 500 times the
current population of the Earth.  At a twentieth of that density, it
would contain 180 billion people, all living with a material standard
of living comparable to current US society.  The corresponding numbers
for Argentina are 2.8 million km², 1.04 trillion people, and 21
billion people.  For Earth, 150 million km², 56 trillion people, and
2.8 trillion people, about 7900 or 400 times the current
population.

At the current population growth rate of 1.1% per year, we'd reach
those population benchmarks in the years 2561 and 2835; but if the
world population were to grow at Qatar's 4.9%, which we know is
possible, we'd reach them in years 2138 and 2201.  In-vitro gestation
would make much higher population growth rates possible.

(Why a twentieth?  Because it brings the total solar power available
to each person to some 5–10kW, or 2½-5kW after conversion to
electricity, putting them on par with modern US consumption of some
10.4kW per person.)

Given the extent to which modern cities are tolerant of pluralism, and
the compatibility of growing vat food with city life, it's probably
not realistic to imagine the eruption of such a new lifestyle in
separated communities; rather, people inside of cities will buy,
separately, solar energy harvesting devices and macronutrient-growing
vats, probably in both cases mostly as emergency fallbacks; and vat
food won't become popular until a generation comes to maturity that
grew up eating it, probably due to a political and economic
catastrophe that forced them to grow up in poverty, like Spam and
horrible boiled vegetables in England after World War II.

Furthermore, vat-growing food won't become a popular thing to do as a
hobby, like bean sprouts or yogurt-making, unless it becomes popular
first as an industrial-scale product, or unless there are regulatory
and political reasons people can't do it on an industrial scale.

Quite aside from the purely factual questions considered above — how
vat food could become established, what population it could support,
where it would likely take root, and so on — there is the normative
question to consider: is a vat-food future dystopic?

Hierarchical or not, it sounds dystopic to me.

Robots
------

Instead of increasing agricultural productivity per square meter,
consider the possibility of extending each farmer's defensive powers.
Today drone pilots in the US armed forces routinely control four
drones at once, each capable of surveillance and unaccountable
targeted violence over a very large geographical area.

If each farmer has at his command some kind of robots, perhaps he
could use the robots, instead of his neighbors, to guard his garden
against raids.  In a sense, this is what happened with the enclosure
of the Old West: instead of robots, ranchers installed barbed-wire
fences ("bob wahr") to keep their cattle from wandering off,
converting their rustler-killing, Native-American-battling pastoralism
into a kind of agriculturalism.  It didn't stop rustlers, but it
slowed them down enough, and it did stop the buffalo.

Now, it seems eminently plausible that one person with a bunch of
video cameras and, say, remotely triggered Tasers, chains, salt-water
squirters, mines, and so on, could police 1500m² of land, which after
all has a perimeter of only 138 meters, against raids.  His neighbor,
or his neighbor's robots, wouldn't be able to step onto his land to
dig his potatoes without his permission.

But could one person really put all of that in place?  Maybe not — but
it seems clear that one person with modern surveillance, computation,
and weapons could defend a larger perimeter than one person without.

So far, though, we've seen a countervailing trend: the increasing
division of labor, and thus specialization, necessary to produce the
computing devices is deeply bound up with the current world system of
enormous states with millions to hundreds of millions of citizens or
subjects.  And while current machinery may not make it particularly
easier to steal potatoes, it certainly makes it a lot easier to cut
chains and blow up mines, enabling attackers as well as defenders —
especially attackers using the power of large states with hundreds of
millions of members.