Current-source grid
===================

Your wall socket is 50Hz or 60Hz, 120 or 240 volts rms ac, but most
importantly it is a voltage source.  That is, the voltage remains
constant at, say, 235 volts, regardless of whether you’re drawing 0
amps or 20 amps from it.  Actually, this is a little bit of a lie; the
voltage does reduce somewhat as you draw current from it.  Maybe the
resistance of the wire in the wall is 1Ω, so if you’re drawing 20
amps, the voltage falls to 215 volts.  And as your house draws more
current, the voltage on the whole circuit to your house from the
transformer falls a bit, though probably not as much as the voltage
drop from the wires in your wall.  But the voltage is *relatively*
constant.

This configuration gives rise to a number of phenomena we’re familiar
with, not all agreeable:

- All of our unswitched outlets are wired in parallel.  Switches are
  wired in series with the devices they control.
- If we touch the prongs of an electric plug as we plug it in or
  unplug it, we get a nasty shock — potentially a deadly one.
- Negative-resistance devices like fluorescent tubes and neon
  lights — as well as fixed-voltage devices like LEDs — require
  auxiliary electronics to operate at all without exploding.
- If an electrical appliance has its insulation fail inside, even if
  it’s a low-power appliance like a VCR or LED lamp, its carcass can
  become electrified — resulting in either a circuit breaker tripping
  (if the ground wire is properly wired) or a deadly shock hazard.
- We can step voltage up for transmission and distribution using
  transformers, but the transformers are heavy and bulky, made from
  laminated electrical steel.
- Even an electrical outlet that is providing no energy to anything is
  potentially hazardous if a toddler sticks hairpins into it.
- 50Hz or 60Hz interference is picked up by everything; under some
  circumstances, many harmonics also appear.  These are audible and
  frequently cause trouble with audio electronics.
- As little as 100 mA of this current can be fatal, and it’s easy for
  human skin to have the <2.4kΩ resistance necessary for this to
  happen.
- The insulation thickness and separation between the conductors is
  sized for the voltage that is always present, with a healthy safety
  factor.  But the thickness of the copper conductor itself is sized
  for a worst-case current that may never be present, again with a
  healthy safety factor.
- As at least one teenager has learned, throwing eggs into an
  electrical substation can cause a dangerous explosion.
- The temperature a heating element reaches depends on its length.  If
  we reduce a heating element to half its length, we double the power
  it dissipates, quadrupling the power density.  In addition to making
  calculations somewhat trickier, this means that sticking a knife in
  the toaster will likely melt the heating element, ruining the
  toaster.
- Every standard electrical cable carries this deadly voltage
  difference, and if cut, can easily melt the cutting tool and cause
  an electrical fire.
- Powering a low-voltage device (like any transistor-based
  electronics) requires either one of those heavy transformers
  mentioned above or a much more complex (and noisy and potentially
  unreliable) switching power supply.
- Fixed-speed single-direction electrical motors (up to 50Hz or 60Hz,
  i.e. 3000 or 3600 rpm) are very simple and extremely reliable, but
  on single-phase power, require either an inefficient shaded-pole
  arrangement or a large and failure-prone starter capacitor to
  guarantee a particular direction of rotation.
- Many switching power supplies have very large inrush currents when
  first plugged in, which frequently results in flying sparks from the
  prongs of the electrical plug.
- We protect our houses and appliances by wiring circuit breakers or
  fuses in series with them.  When the current exceeds the rating of
  the safety device, it disconnects, creating an open-circuit
  condition and its attendant inductive voltage spikes, but cutting
  the current to zero.  However, this generally only cuts the hot side
  of the supply; the problematic appliance remains connected to the
  neutral side, which can still carry a hazardous voltage.
- Short circuits are a bad thing which can result in electrical fires
  and even plasma explosions.  Open circuits are innocent and totally
  normal, occurring whenever we unplug something or turn it off.
- If you start to receive a significant electrical shock, you lose
  control of your muscles, which may cause you to firmly grasp the
  source of the shock, increasing the danger.
- It’s basically impossible to shield the extremely-low-frequency
  emissions and prevent them from escaping a building or penetrating a
  sensitive measuring instrument.

None of these are inherent to electricity in general.  If we used an
RF current source rather than a extremely-low-frequency voltage source, all
of the above items change.

What is a current source?
-------------------------

First, what is a voltage source?

A voltage source is an energy source with a constant voltage across
the load, regardless of the current.  Its output impedance is zero.
The voltage of your wall socket is a close approximation of a voltage
source; its impedance is on the order of 1Ω.  It has a limit to how
much current it can supply — even leaving aside the fuses and circuit
breakers, to draw 240 amps from your 1Ω 240V source, you would need a
short-circuit load, which means that none of the power actually
reaches the load, and also you cannot reduce the impedance any further
in order to draw more current.

A current source, by contrast, is an energy source with a constant
current, regardless of the voltage.  Its output impedance is infinite.
A photovoltaic cell in constant light at a voltage well below its
maximum output voltage is a close approximation of a current source,
because each photon it converts generates an electron-hole pair
regardless of the voltage; I think its impedance is on the order of
1MΩ.  Any current source has a limit to how much voltage it can
supply — if you open-circuit the photovoltaic cell, its voltage will
rise to about 0.7 volts and stay there.  At that point you cannot
reduce the conductance any further in order to get higher voltages.

This is one of many applications of a certain duality in electronics
in which we interchange serial and parallel, voltage and current,
resistance and conductance, and I think capacitance and inductance,
and maybe frequency and period, and everything comes out the same.

The study of electrical currents began with batteries, which are
pretty close approximations to voltage sources.  Current sources, on
the other hand, are generally thought of as artificial or theoretical
constructs.  But in today’s world of power electronics, our voltage
sources are usually complicated circuits, and we can build current
sources just as easily.  Stick-welding machines
and TIG welding machines are commonly designed
as high-power current sources, under the name “constant-current
source”, or “CC”, for example.

Why are RF current sources an interesting alternative?
------------------------------------------------------

It turns out that if you use a current source rather than a voltage
source for your mains power, and run it at a higher frequency, there
are a number of interesting results.  In particular, all of the bullet
points in the first section above become false, and there are a number
of potential safety, cost, and complexity benefits — although of
course we won’t know if these work out in practice until we have real
experience with them.  Current sources defy the expectations we have
built up over centuries of working with voltage sources — among other
things, about what is safe and what is dangerous.  To take the
simplest example, short-circuiting a high-power current source is
totally safe and actually the right way to turn off whatever it’s
powering.  Open-circuiting it, by contrast, can produce a hazardous
voltage.

The extremely low frequencies we’re accustomed to using date from the
late 19th century, when they derived from the frequencies of rotation
of the steam-driven generators used to produce the power.  This
approach is still used today, with generators’ rotation synchronized
to the grid frequency before putting them online.  But supplying power
at higher frequencies has a number of substantial advantages in
safety, electronic noise, and equipment size, cost, and complexity.

In addition to potential uses in houses and industry, this system
should also be useful in spacecraft, where wiring harnesses commonly
contribute an alarming amount both of very expensive mass and of very
expensive power consumption.

Basics
------

Consider a system supplying one ampere at 32768 Hz, the frequency of a
watch crystal, to every wall outlet, with current-source compliance up
to 1000 VAC.

The outlets on a circuit are wired up in series — the current flows
first through one appliance, then another, then another.  When no
appliance is plugged in, a short-circuit shunt is mechanically imposed
across the two terminals of the outlet, so current flows through the
outlet with no significant voltage drop.  When all the outlets on a
circuit are short-circuited, the total resistance of the circuit might
be 1Ω, so the 1A will produce 1V of voltage drop and 1W of power
consumption.

If a 10W appliance is plugged in, once its contacts have made contact
with those of the outlet, its plug mechanically removes the
short-circuit shunt, introducing the appliance into the circuit.  The
appliance’s impedance of 10Ω produces a voltage drop of 10V across the
plug (once the current source’s output voltage rises to match),
delivering 10W to the appliance.

A switched outlet or appliance has the switch in parallel to it.  When
the switch is closed, there is no voltage across the appliance, and
consequently no current through it, or a tiny residual current due to
the tiny voltage drop across the closed switch.  Opening the switch
forces the current to flow through the appliance instead.

A short circuit between an outlet and the neutral wire removes power
from the appliances downstream from it, but causes no other problems.
An open circuit, however, could cause a hazardous voltage, and
therefore safety measures must be taken to shunt current past the open
circuit, just as fuses or circuit breakers must create an open circuit
in a voltage-source system to interrupt hazardous currents.

All the normal wires are the same tiny size, 24 AWG, 510 μm in
diameter, which is enough to carry 1A without getting warm, but not so
thick as to waste any significant copper due to the 400-micron skin
depth in copper at 32768 Hz.  Higher-current internal ac wires in some
appliances need to be made of copper tape of less than 1 mm thick.
The thickness of the wire does not depend on the length of the run,
because the voltage drop is inconsequential; the current source will
automatically raise the voltage to compensate, so that the load will
receive the full 1A anyway, as long as the run isn’t so long as to
approach the current source’s compliance limit (1000 V, thus 1000 Ω at
1 A.)

Physically, the outlets are strange.  The two prongs are each 20 mm
long, with their first 15 mm insulated, as in France; they are
positioned a rather large 40 mm apart, with a ground prong in the
middle.  Behind the outlet, the attachments for the tiny wires are on
strange stalks that curl back around.  All of this is for high-voltage
safety in the unlikely case that a single outlet is called upon to
supply the full 1000 V limit of a circuit; it needs the creepage
allowance not to form a conductive, but high-resistance, path between
the electrodes.

Despite the possibility of using a single wire from one outlet to the
next, in fact the return wire runs alongside the hot wire as a lightly
twisted pair for the whole circuit in order to reduce EMI.  It isn’t
connected to anything until the last outlet in the string.

Each circuit is fed from a separate transformer, a bit smaller than
the usual circuit breaker, on a higher-voltage-compliance
constant-current “bus”, which is wired in series, not in parallel as
usual.  The transformers are center-tapped, and the center tap is
grounded, so the net voltage surrounding the twisted pair of wires is
zero, and of course their net current is also zero.  This reduces EMI
and keeps the voltage from any point to ground to a minimum.  Each
transformer also has a safety shunt attached to it.

Safety
------

First, in at least a couple of ways, the system I’m describing here is
potentially *more* dangerous than the traditional system.  240V is
often not enough to kill you, depending on how dry your skin is.  120V
almost never is.  But one ampere through your arms is traditionally
considered very likely to kill you, and the current source will
happily apply 1000 volts to you if you are suddenly the only path
through its circuit and that is what is needed to drive an ampere
through you.  1000 watts applied to your body is also very likely to
kill you.

Also, kilovolts can do surprising things that the more usual voltages
do not do, jumping through air and burning tracks through dust on
surfaces and whatnot.

However, there are a variety of ways this system is inherently safer,
as well as a number of safety features that can be added.

First, the vast majority of circuits will not have hazardous voltages
present on them at all, because they will not have hundreds of watts
of load, so they won’t need hundreds of ohms of impedance.  And even
those circuits that do have hazardous voltages will generally not have
hazardous voltage differences within a single appliance.

??? I’m conflicted about whether grounding the center taps is a good
idea.  Without that current path to ground, there would never be any
hazardous voltages relative to ground in the system, only potentially
hazardous voltage differences within the circuit.  But without it,
grounding an enclosure will not produce a detectable ground fault if a
hot wire comes in contact with the enclosure.

As explained above, short circuits are not hazardous in a
current-source system — the current source will only supply its usual
current to them, rather than an unbounded current, and they will
dissipate no energy.  Open circuits produce a hazardous voltage but no
immediate fire.  The real danger is near-open circuits of a few kΩ,
which could potentially dissipate a few kW.

I think one amp is not enough to sustain an arc in air (???), which
would eliminate the usual risk of arcing, despite the high voltages.

Using RF is a safety advantage because currents at these frequencies
cannot (???) penetrate deeply into the human body, instead staying on
the skin, and so they cannot cause muscular contractions (???) or
cardiac fibrillation.  They can still cause burns, and RF electrical
burns are notorious, but that requires a lot more energy.
Unfortunately, this system is capable of supplying that energy.

While it’s harmless and probably useful to include traditional series
overcurrent fuses in the system — if the current deviates
significantly above 1 A, you have a bad problem in your current source
and it would be a good idea to disconnect from it — they won’t detect
hazardous voltage soars or open circuits, which are the kinds of
problems that could arise from electrical faults inside your house.

Grounding the cases of appliances provides a more effective safety
measure against hot cases than in the traditional voltage-source
system.  In the standard system, a hot wire contacting the grounded
case produces a ground fault, which fires the circuit breaker.  In
this system, by contrast, it shorts out half of the transformer and
the upstream appliances, effectively dividing the circuit into two
circuits of 500 mA each, joined at a shared ground point.  The
enclosure remains grounded and thus safe to touch; there are no sparks
and no danger of electrical fire.  However, nothing on the circuit
will work properly until the faulty appliance is removed, because it
will be getting a quarter of its usual power.

The simplest safety shunt against open circuits is just a buzzer-type
SPST relay; its normally-closed contacts in series with a
normally-closed pushbutton short the load, and its winding in series
with the load holds those contacts open.  If at some point the load
goes open-circuit, the current through the load and the coil will
cease, the contacts will spring closed, and the load will remain
shunted out of the circuit until someone pushes the pushbutton†.  This
fails safe in case of coil failure and in case of power failure; it
may be inconvenient to have to reset all your circuits after a power
failure, but it’s better than having to replace all your appliances.
It may be possible to tune this circuit to reliably detect the
ground-fault half-current case, too.

The other problem the above circuit has is that it doesn’t actually
limit the voltage; it just responds to the source’s inability to
sustain its current in the face of overwhelming resistance.  In the
case where the source is actually capable of hitting 10kV, it might
fail to activate because the deadly overvoltage has burned a track
across the outlet and is efficiently heating it to incandescence.

A simple truly-overvoltage-driven alternative would be a large gas
tube.  A fluorescent lamp tube would sort of work, but its discharge
maintenance voltage is high enough (in the range of 100V)
that it would probably cause
major damage to the faulty load.

A fully-solid-state alternative might be a diac in series with a small
inductor and a NC pushbutton, driven from a bridge rectifier in
parallel with the load.  If the diac goes into conduction due to
overvoltage, it should crowbar the circuit rather effectively until
someone presses the button; the inductor keeps it in conduction as the
voltage crosses through zero 65536 times per second.  This should give
you under 10V across the circuit.  (e.g. [the Littelfuse K1400GURP
SIDAC][1] can handle an amp steady-state and will crowbar down to 1.2
volts, with a breakover voltage of 130–146V; you could use 7 of them
in series, giving you a breakover of 910–1022 volts, and a voltage of
8.4 volts, plus the bridge and inductor voltages.  It costs 37¢ in
bulk.)

[1]: https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/littelfuse-inc/K1400GURP/F6684CT-ND/5180608

An alternative relay circuit would use a latching relay activated by
current through, say, a calibrated spark gap, MOV, diac, or gas tube.
It could latch either mechanically or, by virtue of energizing its own
coil, electromechanically.  This last has the dubious advantage of
resetting automatically after power failures, including after being
shunted out of the circuit by an upstream shunt.

† At which point the circuit potentially goes really open-circuit if
the load still isn’t repaired, thus causing further safeties to trip
further upstream, so maybe this design is inadequate.  Or maybe you
just need two of them, maybe controlled with a make-before-break
pushbutton that opens one circuit after closing the other.

Appliance design
----------------

Everything is topsy-turvy in the current-source world, but it’s
overall simpler.  It’s fine for things to short out when they fail;
it’s problematic and possibly dangerous for them to create open
circuits, for example by breaking the filament of an incandescent
lightbulb.  If your lightbulb filament breaks, it will trip the safety
shunt, and you will probably want to turn off all the lightbulbs on
the circuit, reset the safety, and then turn them on one at a time
until you figure out which one is tripping the safety.

Resistive heating is simple.  1Ω is 1W.  To get a given temperature
under given cooling conditions, you use a given filament; you get the
same temperature no matter how much of it you use, but more filament
gives you more power.  You should probably mount it on some kind of
conductive backing with light insulation in between so that it becomes
a short circuit if it melts, not an open circuit.

More resistance gives you more power; this is precisely backwards from
the situation with voltage sources, where load resistance and power
are inversely proportional.

3V 1.5W LEDs can be driven directly from the regulated 1A with no
resistor.  Smaller LEDs will burn out; larger LEDs will only shine
1.5W.  Large fluorescent tubes of about 100W can, too, with no ballast
or starter, as long as they can cold-cathode start at a low enough
voltage, and fast enough to keep the safety shunt from tripping.  50W
tubes should work if half-wave rectified — with one diode in series
and another opposite diode shunting the combination.  But most LEDs
and fluorescent lights will require some kind of power supply.

Voltage-step-up transformers can be used to step down the current for
some of these devices, such as small LEDs.  Voltage-step-down
transformers are probably useful to step up the current for larger
resistive elements, so that they can use thicker wire.

Low-voltage low-power power supplies are really easy; a tiny 1A
47-microhenry inductor has an impedance of ωL = 4.8Ω and thus a
voltage across it of 4.8V (ac rms), which is 6.8V peak.  Stick a
silicon bridge rectifier across that, dropping 1.4V, and you can
charge a capacitor to 5.4V dc at any current up to 100mA average or so
(at which point the inductor voltage starts to drop because you’re
stealing its current).  For 10% ripple at 100mA, the capacitor itself
only needs to bear the 100mA for 15.3 microseconds without dropping
more than 0.5V, which means 3 μF is adequate; an LC filter would allow
you to use a smaller capacitor and also get better stability.  If you
want a regulated voltage, you might want to use a slightly larger
inductor to get more like 9V peak, then drive a 7805 off it.  Then it
would be okay to steal more current from the inductor.

In any case, you won’t have any 50Hz or 60Hz ripple.  You’ll have
32768Hz ripple, plus some harmonics like 65536Hz and 98304Hz, which
are a lot easier to filter out.

Combining the two above, you can quite reasonably use a
voltage-step-down transformer to feed a 22μH inductor 5A, then
rectify, filter, and regulate, to get a 60% efficient 1A 5V regulated
USB power supply in five components.

In the simplest case, of course, you can get a voltage by using a
resistor rather than an inductor, but it will dissipate power.  Or you
could use an unpolarized capacitor of a few μF.

Inrush currents from hooking up capacitors to line voltage no longer
exist.  Instead you have inductive voltage spikes when you switch an
inductor into the 1A circuit.  You may want a snubber network to tame
this, but that may be unnecessary — you aren’t going to design in an
inductor with more than 1kΩ of reactance, which means more than 10mH.
½LI² = 5 mJ, which may not be enough energy to cause any real
problems.

Switching power supplies are still a thing, despite the greatly
increased convenience of old-style transformer power supplies, and
they need no inductors.  If you were using dc instead of ac, a
switching power supply amounts to switching between a dead short and a
capacitor-diode series.  You run your voltage-regulated circuit off
the capacitor, and the diode keeps the capacitor from discharging
during the time that the power is turned off with a short.  You can do
this with ac if you use a bridge rectifier or just a
reverse-protection diode.  For lower-power supplies, you could just
use a rectifier diode to generate a voltage dissipatively and switch
that voltage onto a capacitor at times.

Squirrel-cage induction motors should be barely feasible: 800 poles
around the stator should give you 164 revolutions per second, which is
9840 RPM.  The “squirrel cage” should probably be a millimeter-thick
copper or aluminum sheet.  I don’t think you can use laminated
electrical steel in the rotor at these frequencies.  On the plus side,
the starter capacitor can be quite small.

Universal motors are not feasible at all without rectification.

Wire diameter, resistance, and cost
-----------------------------------

The higher peak voltages allowed by a current-source system, as well
as the automatic compensation for wiring losses, allow us to use much
lower maximum currents and therefore thinner wire than in the
traditional system.  Instead of building the copper for the worst case
and the insulation for the average case, it allows us to build the
copper for the average case and the insulation for the worst case.
Insulation is much cheaper than copper.

[24AWG copper wire is 510μm in diameter and 84Ω/km][0], and it’s
recommended for currents up to 3.5 A.  84Ω/km means 84mΩ/m and
thus, at 1A, 84 mW/m, which is not totally insignificant in terms of heating,
but not really dangerous either.  It means you can go over 5 km round
trip with this wire before you hit the source’s 1000 V compliance
limit.

[0]: http://www.powerstream.com/Wire_Size.htm

A bigger issue at these frequencies is likely to be stray inductance.
1Ω is only 9.7 μH.  The twisted pairs should reduce this problem, but
they won’t eliminate it.

Copper’s density of 9.0 g/cc means this works out to 1.8 grams per
meter of wire, or 3.6 g if you run the neutral wire next to the hot
one.  But that doesn’t count the insulation, which needs to be safe at
1000 V.

100 turns of this wire on an inductor work out to a coil, say, 5.1 mm
long and 5.1 mm thick, for maybe 15 mm of diameter on the whole
inductor.  Transformers might be a little larger.  None of that takes
into account the insulation, though, so probably the reality will be
several times that.

1000 V probably needs over 16 mm clearance between exposed conductors
and 64 mm creepage distance, although I should look up the standards.

As explained in the “appliance design” section, the higher frequencies
allow the use of much smaller capacitors, inductors, and transformers,
which dramatically reduces cost and weight.  The current-mode design
allows us to get whatever voltage we want by adjusting a reactance;
the use of rf ac allows us to get whatever current we want with a
tiny transformer.

Etc.
----

 are too high for humans to hear, so
they cause less problems with audio equipment; and they

