As described in file `dercuano-drawings`, I want to add illustrations
to Dercuano.  Some of the cases where illustrations will help most are
the shapes of three-dimensional objects, and it occurs to me that in
many such cases it might be easier and quicker to specify the
three-dimensional geometry of the objects than to sketch them by hand.

The trouble is that I want to make sort of casual sketches, and the
semi-photographic quality of normal rendering makes conspicuous any
insufficiency in the models being rendered; also, shiny eye-catching
rendered graphics might be eye-catching enough to detract from the
kind of thoughtful consideration I’d like the reader to be able to
apply.  So some kind of non-photorealistic rendering might work
better.

In particular, I was thinking that maybe by using lines of varying
width or varying darkness, I could get a kind of engraving effect,
though maybe that’s too skeuomorphic.  To the extent that the lines
run in straight lines (geodesics) along the surface of the 3-D model,
they can additionally help by showing the curvature of the surface; to
the extent that their orientations aren’t determined by the view, the
projection will tend to skew them in a way that shows the orientation
of the surface even when it isn’t flat.

It might be simplest, and perhaps adequate, just to render things in
grayscale, though.

Slow, perhaps periodic rotation or nutation might also help with
showing 3-D structure; perhaps motion-blurring it would prevent the
motion from being too distracting.

A separate question is how to carry out the construction of the 3-D
model.  Of course this can be almost arbitrarily easy or arbitrarily
difficult, but the methods available to date leave a lot to be
desired.  Listing center-coordinates, radii, and colors of spheres is
simple, but there’s only so much you can build with spheres, and it’s
a time-consuming way to build it.  CSG is intuitive, for what it can
express, but algorithmically it can be very challenging, and it’s
worthless for modeling tree bark, filleted joints, or smooth curves,
and again, it’s (often) very time-consuming to use.  Teddy 3D is
intuitive but difficult to achieve precise results with.  The
constraint-solving pipeline approach used by FreeCAD, CATIA, and
SolidWorks (modeled on the approach taken by Sutherland’s SKETCHPAD)
is clearly capable of constructing very complex shapes, but these
programs’ solvers not infrequently fail to converge, and when they
almost fail to converge, are quite slow.

