I wanted to spiff up the Dercuano display a little so that it would be
pleasant to read, but more with the objective of being like a book
than being like an advertising brochure.  [When I started writing
this, the only CSS thing I’d done was give it a max-width to keep the
lines from being 2000 pixels long.]

But what does a book look like?  What does a good web page look like?
Are they different?

Medium
------

Marcin Wichary of Medium wrote an article entitled, “Crafting link
underlines on Medium,” in which he talks about how to get link
underlines to work.  He describes a CSS hack using background images
“synthesized *via*” gradients, and also describes a further hack using
a white CSS text shadow to make it clear descenders, which they
apparently don’t actually use — but Gwern does something like this,
see [below](#gwern).

I looked at Medium to see how they’re doing things.  They set the
article title and article text in a serif font (falling back to
Georgia if their proprietary font fails to load) and article section
titles in a sans-serif font (falling back, similarly, to Helvetica);
everything uses rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.84) except for the line underneath the
title in gray and the pullquotes.  (0.84 is the fourth root of ½.)
The article had a font-size of 21 pixels and a line-height of 1.4; the
main article title had font-size of 46 pixels; and the subtitles were
somewhere in between in size.  The subtitles were somewhat bold and
left-aligned.

The article section titles have some vertical whitespace around them,
but I don’t remember how much.

Article category links are at the end of the article in light gray
boxes with rounded corners, generally all on the same line.

They’re using a different serif font with Clarendon slab serifs for
drop-caps, and to get hanging punctuation on paragraphs that open with
open-quotes, they use a paragraph-opening-with-open-quotes class to
set text-indent to -0.4em.

The body text is set in a single column with a max-width of 700
pixels, which works out to 33 ems.  It’s centered with `margin: foopx
auto` at the appropriate level of nesting; inline images are also
centered but in a wider column, so they can reach the margins on a
small screen (Wichary pompously dubs this “our signature full-bleed,
blurred images” in his post).
Despite using a serif font like a real book, they use a
ragged right margin, at least in Chrome — possibly a concession to the
lack of hyphenation.

At times they use thin spaces around their em dashes, as I do.

Medium goes to some trouble to use hanging punctuation, like
Gutenberg, but it only works sometimes.

Font files: ET Book!
--------------------

I looked at downloading Noto to bundle, but Noto is humongous; the
whole bundle is 1.1 GB, and even just a CJK ideograph bundle is 100+
megs.  So I pretty much have to rely on system fonts for Dercuano,
since keeping the download bundle self-sufficient and small is pretty
much the whole point.  (Also, I can’t find a Noto subset that includes
the Latin letters this text is written in.)

Later, though, on [Fernando Irarrázaval’s blog], I found the ET Book
Bembo-like font family, which has been released under the MIT license
by Edward Tufte and its authors, Dmitry Krasny and Bonnie Scranton.
The four fonts I’m including, three of which I’m using, gzip to 180K,
even though they cover all of Latin-1, plus a bit more!  And it’s
beautiful, especially the italic, and it has old-style figures.  It
even has ligature glyphs, although mysteriously the browser doesn’t
use them, apparently because the font isn’t specifying the necessary
context rules.

So I’ve switched to ET Book.  But the 22px size I was using before
(DejaVu Serif, the system default) is a lot bigger than the 22px size
of ET Book.  The equivalent ET Book size is nearly 28px.  Now DejaVu
Sans Mono looks dramatically oversized, its x-height being nearly as
tall as the Antiqua capitals.  So I twiddled several things to
compensate:

- I used ET Book 26px as the default, reducing the line-height from
  1.5 to 1.4 to compensate;
- I reduced `<pre>` and also `<code>` to font-size: 80%;
- I shortened max-width from 45em to 35em.

These are somewhat suboptimal if ET Book doesn’t load for some reason
(maybe your browser doesn’t support .ttf webfonts, although Firefox
and Chromium do,
or if you’re experiencing a Firefox bug, as I think I am at the moment)
but not catastrophic.  In particular the line length
in ET Book is a little longer than I would like so that it's not
uncomfortably short if ET Book fails to load.

Characters not covered by ET Book are typically problematic, e.g., the
lowercase Greek in the title of file `plato-inferior`, because they
are taller, wider, bolder, and have less stress than ET Book, at least
on my machine.  I’m not sure what to do about that; shipping Cardo is
not an option, as it would add a megabyte or more to the package size.
I might be able to scale the letterforms and bearings in ET Book by
125% to fix it (and undo the stylesheet changes).

The biggest coverage problem is the numeric superscripts: ⁰¹²³⁴⁵⁶⁷⁸⁹.
ET Book covers ¹²³, while the others come from a fallback font, with
fairly disastrous effects on the readability of things like “*x*⁶²”,
which looks more like “*x*<sup>6<sub>2</sub></sup>” than the intended
“*x*<sup>62</sup>”.

Mark Shoulson points out that in addition to lacking ligature tables,
leading to the same missing ligatures I complain about in _The Grammar
of Graphics_,
the font also lacks kerning tables, leading to kerning that looks precisely
like the kerning I complain of below in [_Tick, Tock_](#ticktock).

[Fernando Irarrázaval’s blog]: https://fernandoi.cl/blog/posts/altair/

Books
-----

There’s an interesting question as to whether type should be larger or
smaller on a computer screen than in a book.  On a computer screen, of
course, you never run out of paper; the “paper” is free; so maybe you
should use larger type.  But often the screen is smaller than a
two-page spread in a book, and if you have two books open at once they
have to share the same screen; so maybe you should use smaller type.
But often the screen is of much worse resolution, so maybe you should
use larger type.  And maybe the screen is further away, so maybe you
should use larger type.

But probably the differences from standard book practices for books
should be justifiable.  For example, books don’t have to be readable
on a cellphone screen, and when they can take advantage of color or
even grayscale, it adds substantial extra cost, and it suffers a
substantial loss of resolution due to halftoning.  Furthermore,
printing with movable type *on top of* a color or even grayscale
background, as opposed to inserting figures, is basically impossible.
So there might be reasons other than imitating sales brochures for
using color.

In the other direction, common browsers (notoriously Chromium) still
don’t do hyphenation, and their paragraph-filling algorithms are
minimialistic at best, and justification in browsers never adds
letter-spacing, so enabling justification in CSS gives you wildly
varying word spacing, which looks shitty.  So if you’re targeting web
browsers you need to suck it up and accept ragged right margins.  Or,
if you’re sufficiently eccentric, ragged left or ventilated prose.

The rigors of five and a half centuries of metal type printing,
concurrent with the birth of capitalism, salutary as they have been
for human attempts at civilization, have not been kind to typography.
The aesthetic experience of reading has been compromised by first one
and then another vulgar commercial innovation — lining numerals,
sans-serif fonts, copyright, typewriter fonts, banner ads, paywalls,
product placement — while the limitations of metal type have been
embraced as virtues by generations of typographers.  Rubrication is no
longer red, but black, and color is indeed omitted almost entirely;
swashes are rare flourishes; illustrations are separated from text by
rigid rectangular borders and even omitted altogether; drop caps and
other initials are abjured or relegated to extreme rarity, perhaps one
per thousand pages; border ornamentation is minimal when it is present
at all; marginalia are omitted; justification of lines can only be
done by altering spacing rather than stretching glyphs; letters are
present only in one to four sizes rather than a full variety; etc.

The major overall limitation, really, is that in movable-type
printing, things cannot overlap.  Swashes cannot overlap other letters
or margins; words cannot protrude into margins; text blocks cannot
overlap illustrations; descenders of one line cannot overlap ascenders
of another, creating a pressure toward greater and greater x-heights,
destroying much of the beauty of minuscule; diacritics cannot overlap
multiple letters; and only through the hacks of kerning and ligatures
could we even get reasonable spacing for most letter combinations
involving capitals and “f”.

To be sure, these last centuries have brought beneficial innovations
as well.  The ample use of whitespace to improve readability,
beginning with division into paragraphs; boldface for scannability;
the elimination of scribal abbreviations, and especially the
abominable Tironian notes, which saved precious parchment at the price
of promoting ignorance among the people; the improved calligraphic
quality of commonplace fonts over all but the best scribal
calligraphy; photographic printing; four-color halftoning; data plots,
and especially the work done by Tufte to improve them; algorithmic
rendering; the modern language of mathematical formulas; hyperlinks;
simulation; animation; interactivity; but most of all, mechanical
reproducibility.

### _T<sub>E</sub>X: the Program_ ###

This book is arguably some kind of referent for readable typesetting,
but maybe not the copy of it I’m looking at.  On my monitor at a
comfortable zoom, the line spacing in its paragraphs is about 32
pixels, the x-height is about 11 pixels, and the spacing of lowercase
“m”s is about 25 pixels; and a line is about 1350 pixels wide, which
is a bit wide for my taste (about 19 words per line!) but certainly
helps with the justification.  And the paragraphs in the book are
mostly very short, so long lines don’t impede readability as much as
they might.

If we take the font size (1 em) to be nominally 24 pixels, that works
out to a CSS line-height of 1.33 (ems), a width of 56.25 ems, an “m”
of 1.04 ems, and an x-height of 0.46 ems, which is pretty readable.

At this zoom, the page is 285 mm wide, which is 1.36× the 210-mm width
of A4 paper and 1.32× the 216-mm width of US letter-size paper it was
most probably formatted for, and those 1350-pixel lines are 217 mm
wide, which is 161 μm per pixel (158 dpi).  We can conclude that the
book was set in type of around 24 pix · 1.32 · 161 μm/pix = 5.1 mm =
14.5 PostScript points.

Each section (of which most consist of a single paragraph) begins with
a boldfaced paragraph number for hyperlinking, and some of them also
include a boldfaced topic for that “part”, which is typically several
pages’ worth, and begins at the top of a new page.  This inline “part
header” is the same size as the rest of the text.  Between sections,
there is a blank space (a vertical skip) of about a line in height,
and there is a smaller vertical skip between text and code.  Code is
annotated below with a backlink in smaller type: “This code is used in
section 726,” and sometimes also, “See also sections 20, 26, ...”.
The smaller type is reduced in size by about a factor of 1.4.

There is no further rubrication other than the index and table of
contents at the end of the book.

<h3 id="ticktock"><em>TickTock</em></h3>

This is a Dean R. Koontz thriller, or possibly a comedic satire of
thrillers.  The copy I have here is a Ballantine paperback, justified
with narrow margins (9 mm) in a traditional curved-serif font, with
paragraph indents and no extra vertical space between paragraphs.  The
apostrophes are poorly kerned with too much space to their right;
combinations like “ov”, “Vi”, and “To” are also kerned,
or rather not kerned, with too much
space — perhaps if Koontz had known his book would be printed like
this, he wouldn’t have named his main character “Tommy”.  There are 32
lines per page; the last 31 of them measure 147 mm
in total height, giving 4.7 mm or
13.4 PostScript points per line; the spacing between letters “m” is
about 4.0 mm or about 11 points.  This suggests that the book is set
in 12-point type with about an extra 0.12 ems of leading between the
lines.

This book was printed in 1996, so it doesn’t have any vertical
typewriter quotes; all of its quotes and apostrophes are of the proper
9, double 6, and double 9 types.

Each page holds about 290 words, which works out to 9.1 words per
line; within paragraph bodies (excluding indents and last lines) the
average is closer to 10.
The lines measure 85 mm wide, which would be 20 ems if my 12-point-type
guess above is correct.
Typically there are zero to two hyphenations
per page, so at times the word spacing is a bit uneven, but the
average word length is pretty short, so it’s not as bad as you’d
think; to illustrate the word length, here’s a randomly chosen
paragraph on p. 210:

> “But I *don’t* believe they come all the way across the galaxy to
> kidnap people and take them up in flying saucers and examine their
> genitals.”

There are abundant italics, but outside of titles, there is no
boldface.

The main book title on the title page (in bold capitals) has a
line-height of about 15 mm (43 points), and the author’s name is set
below it (in bold capitals) with a line-height of about 11 mm (31
points).  Each chapter title (“ONE”, “TWO”, “A NOTE TO THE READER”,
etc.) is set (in bold capitals) with a line-height of about 7 mm,
underlined with the same small illustration.  Chapter titles start on
new pages, but many start on even pages, leaving no pages blank.
Other than page headers, there is no other rubrication or division in
the book, such as horizontal rules or lines of asterisks.

The book feels a bit crowded with its 2-em margins, short lines,
narrow leading, and no vertical skips.  But I suppose lulling you into
too much tranquility would defeat the purpose of the book, as well as
cutting into Ballantine’s profits with extra paper costs.

### _The Grammar of Graphics_ ###

This is a recent (2005) semi-academic book published in hardcover by
Springer, with, unusually, bright white glossy paper and
color — apparently finely halftoned CMYK, on every page.  That’s
because it’s a treatise on the visual display of quantitative
information, and the authors have dedicated a great deal of care to
its visual appearance; they set it in Times Roman and Times Italic
with FrameMaker.  There is a strong hierarchical structure to the
book, with numbered section headings that frequently run four levels
deep (“*6.2.5.3 Fisher’s z Scale*”), which are all in Times Italic.
There are occasional subheadings before level-4 headings, which are not
numbered.  Paragraphs are indented (except when following a heading)
and justified, but with no extra vertical skip between them.

There are about 46 lines per page, although there is extra leading
around headings, figures, equations, and blockquotes, and the text
never runs for an entire page without being interrupted with headings,
figures, equations, or blockquotes.  Lines are 115 mm long, typically
containing about 12–14 words, and the lines within a single paragraph
are rather tight; 10 lines are 40 mm high, giving 4.0 mm or 11.3
points as the line height, and the escapement of an “m” also measures
4.0 mm.  (XXX apparently it’s more like 3.0 mm?)  Hyphenation is quite
frequent, so whitespace is very consistent despite justification.
Margins are a generous 20mm to the sides and 22mm at the bottom of the
page; the top margin below the page heading is smaller, more like 9mm,
but there’s another 15mm above the page heading.

This suggests that the text is set in 11-point Times Roman with no
leading and 30-em lines.

Level-1 headings (“14. Time”) are chapter headings.  The chapter
number is set in bold italic with a line height of about 16 mm
(44 pt), while the chapter name is set below it below an 8-mm skip in
medium italic at about 8 mm (22 pt).  Both of these parts of the
heading are right-aligned.  The page heading above the chapter title is
omitted, and blank pages are used to ensure that chapters always begin
on odd pages.  Below the chapter heading, there is a skip of some 24 mm
above the body text.

Level-2 headings (“14.1 Mathematics of Time”) are set in italic, with
the heading number in bold, and are set somewhat larger than the body
text, perhaps twice the point size (8 mm, 22 pt), though it seems to
be about 25% smaller than the chapter title somehow.  There is only a
small extra skip below them, but about a one-line skip above them.
There is an extra large space, about a quad, between the number and
the title; they also do this after bullets in bulleted lists, and
Knuth also did it after section numbers.

Level-3 headings (“14.1.1 Deterministic Models of Time”) are set in the
same bold/bold-italic combination of styles, but in a slightly smaller
font-size, again by about 25%, but still about a 50% larger point size
than the body text.  These *do* have extra leading below them, though
less than above.

Level-4 headings (“14.1.1 Orbits and Vibrations”) are set entirely in
bold italic, and the body text is smaller than they are by about 25%.
Perhaps the bold is intended to add contrast with the body text to
compensate for the smaller difference in size, or perhaps bold was not
used in the larger titles simply to avoid overwhelming the reader.
Again, they have extra leading above and below.

Level-5 subheadings (e.g., “Updates” on p. 438, within §14.3.3.1
“Data”) are the same size and with apparently the same leading as
level-4 headings, but without numbers.

FrameMaker’s typesetting of the equations is very much inferior to
T<sub>E</sub>X’s, with poor kerning, parentheses that fail to enclose
and whose line thickness never varies (though that of the letters and
digits does), and so on.  Aside from that, though, its layout is much
the same.

The leading above headings, of course, goes away when they are at the
top of a page.

They use a monoline sans-serif font for the names of their data
series.

Figures are captioned below in italic; text never flows around
figures.

I think a good approximation of the layout can be expressed as follows:

1. Body text is 11-point Times Roman with 30-em justified paragraphs.
   Paragraphs that don’t follow headings are indented by two ems.  Body
   text has no extra leading, even between paragraphs.
2. The text sizes of headings of levels 4, 3, 2, and 1 are a geometric
   progression ending at 22 points; this would make them 13.1-point,
   15.6-point, 18.5-point, and 22-point, or, expressed in ems of the
   body text, 1.19 ems, 1.41 ems, 1.68 ems, and 2.0 ems.
4. Except that chapter numbers are on a separate line in 44-point text.
5. Chapter headings are right-aligned with page breaks to an odd page
   before them.  All other headings are left-aligned with leading above
   them equal to their line-height and leading below equal to the
   line-height of the body text.

Occasionally two headings (of different levels) occur in succession.

Although the fonts used are pretty nice, and the layout and design are
reasonable (aside from the truly lamentable formulas), the text is
mysteriously entirely missing ligatures; “fi” and “ffi” do not appear
as joined “ﬁ” and “ﬃ” as they should.

### _How to Make a Telescope_ ###

This is a 1957 English translation, published in the US by
Interscience Publishers, of Jean Texereau’s 1951 French text _La
construction du télescope d’amateur_.  This copy was apparently
acquired by the Northtown–Shiloh Library in Dayton in 1958 (and
rebound by The Kalmbacher Bookbinding Co., in Toledo), so it was
probably printed in 1957.  Like _Grammar of Graphics_, it’s printed
entirely on glossy paper, although it’s yellowed a bit in the ensuing
60 years; the purpose is again fine halftoning, but this time only in
black and white.

Its body text is set in a serif font
in justified paragraphs with about twice as much space
after periods and colons as between words.  The paragraphs
occasionally have figures centered in the middle of them; they never
flow around figures, and they are all indented, by about three or four
ems.  More surprisingly, section headings within chapters (“II-18.  The
Polishing Operation” — bold, in the same size as the body text, with
leading below and even more extra leading above) are also indented by
the same amount as the paragraphs.  10 lines occupy 42 mm, so the line
spacing is 11.9 points — might as well call it 12 points.

The chapter titles (“II.  Making the Main Mirror”) are preceded by
page breaks to put them at the top of an odd-numbered page, and with a
page-width vertical rule underneath the (right-justified) Roman
numeral, below which is a vertical skip of some 17 mm, and
right-justified, given extra letter-spacing, in a sans-serif font, in
all capitals, in a somewhat larger text size (perhaps 16 points rather
than 12), is the title.  Beneath the title is another 20mm of leading
and then the section heading of the first section of the chapter.

The Roman numerals at the openings of chapters are still larger than
the chapter titles themselves; perhaps they reach 24 points.

Some of the numbered sections are contain unnumbered subsections,
indicated in the table of contents; the subsection titles occur at the
beginning of a paragraph in italic.

References are given in footnotes in a somewhat smaller font, perhaps
9 pt.

Data tables are captioned above in all capitals (in the same font as
the body text) and divided into sections with page-width horizontal
rules.  Columns are separated by whitespace with no rules.  Figures
are captioned below in the same smaller font used for footnotes.

### _The Palmer Method of Business Writing_ ###

This book was published in 1915; [the copy I’m looking at][2] was
digitized from the collection of the University of California, and I
downloaded the DjVu from the Internet Archive.  A Microsoft watermark
contaminates every page.  It’s a penmanship textbook.  Both its layout
and its textual tone are considerably more bombastic than the other
specimens I looked at above.

[2]: https://archive.org/details/palmermethodofbu00palmrich

I don’t have a reliable way to determine its absolute size, since I
have only a DjVu scan.

Sans-serif fonts make no appearance whatsoever, except possibly in the
legend on the original book cover, “THE A. N. PALMER COMPANY, New
York, …”, which I can’t be sure of because DjVu has corrupted it too
badly.  The book is full of black-and-white photos (presumably
halftoned) and illustrations (which are not); at times the text flows
around them, but usually they are placed above and below the text.

The pages are, unusually, in landscape orientation, and seem to have
been bound on a short edge; the ratio is about 5 parts length to 3
parts height.  Although the typography is somewhat inconsistent, often
varying in the body text size from page to page, it is mostly set in
two columns, with extra spacing separating sentences
(plus spaces inside quote marks), but
headings and most of the abundant illustrations span both columns.
Occasionally body text also spans both columns, typically for very
short sections.  Boldface is used liberally, for all the headings and
occasionally for emphasis in the body text, while italic is entirely
absent.

The body text is set fairly tight with no apparent leading.  The
columns are about 35 ems wide, and separated by about two ems.  The
paragraphs, even the first, are indented by about three ems, and are
of course justified, with only very occasional hyphenation, resulting
in substantial variation in word spacing.  Occasionally there is a
vertical skip of a line or so between paragraphs, but not usually.
Evidently no concern has been given to preventing widows and orphans,
as they occur frequently, while unequal column lengths never occur at
all.

The headings found throughout the book (“LESSON 80”, “Drill 95”) are
centered and boldfaced.  Typically each section has a title (“LESSON
76”) which may be broken onto two lines (“LESSON 70”, “Drill 85”) or
written on a single line with an em dash, and may sections also have a
subtitle (“TO RELIEVE MUSCULAR TENSION”); the subtitle is about 1.5
times the point size of the body text, and the title is about 1.5
times larger than that.  These headings have equal and miserly leading
above and below.

Semantically the “Drills” are subordinate to the “lessons” in the
sense that some lessons contain more than one drill, and may contain
other sections, whether or not headed by what I’ve called a
“subtitle”, that aren’t part of a “drill”.

Many pages have a centered boldface injunction at the bottom in the
same point size as the body text, saying things like, “It is not
Palmer Method if the lines are tremulous.  Study the instructions for
speed requirements.”  On p. 19 instead this same injunction is
repeated in large boldface type at the top of the page, with the
period removed so it will fit.  Truly, the typographic crimes of this
manual are manifold.

Some paragraphs, though indented as usual, begin with an inline heading
in boldface followed by an em dash or colon:

> **Height**—Reference has already been made to one-sixteenth of an

> **To the teacher:**  If you have studied the lessons in advance, have

As an interesting side note, where arrows are present in the diagrams,
they are fletched.

### _Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers_ ###

This is the [1922 Fifth Edition][0], scanned from a copy at the University
of Toronto library.  It’s printed by The Maple Press of York, PA, but
copyright by the McGraw–Hill Book Company.

[0]: https://archive.org/details/standardhandbook00fowluoft

It does use italics, as well as small caps, but still has no
sans-serif fonts.

The book is divided into “sections” rather than “chapters”.  Section
titles are centered, bold, in all caps, with extra letter-spacing and
a largish vertical skip above them, and a short centered horizontal
rule below them above the subtitles, if present, and body text.  The
title is about 1.5 times the point size of the body text.  Paragraphs
are indented (by about one em), even the first, and justified with
generous hyphenation, and line spacing is somewhat loose.  Margins are
very narrow (on p. 377 the operator scanned their finger, and much of
the material near the spine is lost to the Scribe’s glass join).
There is extra spacing between sentences,
and quotes seem to be concatenated apostrophes,
perhaps with extra whitespace inside of them.  There are places where
letter-spacing is compromised for the sake of justification, as on
p. 62.

(Because p. 19 has a ruler printed on it, I can report an absolute
text size for this book: at “300%” zoom, 30mm of the original book is
58mm on my screen, so the actual zoom is 193%.  9 lines of body text
being 37 mm on my screen means that they were 19.1 mm in the original
book, so the body text was printed at the minuscule size of 6
PostScript points!)

Section subtitles are centered, bold, in all caps, at a size
intermediate between that of the body text and the section title, so
about 1.2 times the point size of the body text.  At times there is an
additional sub-subtitle in centered italics at the normal body text
style.  There is some inconsistency.  We have:

<center>
> **SECTION 2**  
> ****
> **ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC CIRCUITS**  
> **BY VLADIMIR KARAPETOFF,**  
> *Professor of Electrical Engineering, Cornell University, Fellow,
> American Institute of Electrical Engineers*  
> **CONTENTS**
</center>

Here “SECTION 2” is what I’ve been calling a “section title”,
“ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC CIRCUITS” is formatted at the same point size
but bolder and without the extra letter-spacing; the author’s byline
is formatted at the intermediate font size I called a “subtitle”
before; his credentials are centered, wrapped, in italics; and
“CONTENTS” is formatted as a subsection heading as described later.
But then, on the next page, we have:

<center>
> **SECTION 2**  
> ****  
> **ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC CIRCUITS**  
> **ELECTRIC POTENTIAL**
</center>

And here we have returned to the formatting I described above: section
title, rule, subtitle, subsection heading.

Sections are mostly divided into subsections, which have their own
(centered, bold, all-caps) headings, usually at the same point size as
the body text, with a little extra leading above and
below — especially above, in cases where the page is a bit loose.  In
some cases they use a larger font, as on p. 576, and may have a
subsection subtitle (centered, all-caps, bold, at the size of the body
text), as on p. 897, where it gives the author’s name.

Within the body of the book, paragraphs are numbered and begin with a
boldface title, which sometimes forms part of a sentence, e.g.,
“**5. The English weights and measures** are based upon old Roman
weights and measures.”  Paragraph numbering does not restart after
subsection headings.  At times the numbering becomes hierarchical,
perhaps to maintain numbering compatibility across editions, with
numbers such as **2.**, **3(a₁)**, **3(b₂)**, and **3(B)**, which
inexplicably comes between paragraphs **3(b₂)** and **3(c₁)**.
Hyperlinks between paragraphs also use bold for the paragraph number:
“(Par.**102**).”  In the introductory part, a larger text size is
used, making the paragraphs about 25 ems wide, but in the body of the
book, the paragraphs are about 32 ems wide due to their smaller font
size.

Occasionally an numbered “paragraph” is divided into multiple
typographical paragraphs, each indented and commonly with a boldface
title.

Text flows around figures, which are captioned below and numbered
using small caps for the abbreviation “Fig.”.  The caption is
typically formatted as a wrapped centered paragraph, but sometimes
justified.

Footnotes are used frequently to cite sources, separated from the body
text on the page with a page-width horizontal rule; they are not
numbered but use the symbols \*, †, ‡, §, ||, ¶, and then \*\*, ††,
etc.  In other cases sources are simply cited in the body text, or in
a bibliography at the end of a section.  (In one case Simpson’s Rule
is given in a footnote stretched across two pages.)

Equations are centered, inserted into the middle of sentences with no
extra leading, and some of them are numbered on the right.  The line
before the equation is not justified, as if it ended a paragraph
(difficult to avoid in cases where it consists simply of, say, “or”,
as on p. 59), but the line after it is not indented, and typically
continues the sentence containing the equation.  In some cases, the
line with the equation ends with a comma or semicolon that forms part
of the sentence.

Amusingly, integrals are sometimes written using “∂” for the
differential, sometimes written with an italic *d*, and sometimes omit
the differential entirely.

Boldface is used within paragraphs for emphasis, perhaps to aid
skimming:

> **11. The meter** was selected as a length equal to the **ten
> millionth part** of the **northern quadrant of the earth**, or
> distance from pole to equator…

Page headers have the section title, centered in italic caps, and on
the side away from the fold, give the section and paragraph numbers in
bold, e.g., “Sec. 1—5 *UNITS, FACTORS, AND TABLES*” or “*UNITS,
FACTORS, AND TABLES* Sec. 1–11”.

Extra leading is often but not always used between paragraphs, perhaps
to stretch the page to the right height; in these cases extra leading
is also used above subsection headings, as mentioned above.

Ordered lists are usually indicated with parenthesized italic letters
(*a*) (*b*) (*c*) and occasionally with numbers and periods
1. 2. 3. or numbers with parentheses (1) (2) (3).  Occasionally they
are split into a paragraph (not part of the normal paragraph
numbering) per item, and those paragraphs are indented as usual.
Occasionally, as on p. 1505, the list items are given a hanging indent
of another couple of ems (so the first line is indented by one em and
subsequent lines by three), and even nested lists are found, with the
nested list items indented to an intermediate level.  No extra leading
is used in any case.  Bulleted lists do not occur.

Tables generally use both horizontal and vertical rules to separate
rows and columns, broken at intersections, and are usually printed in
landscape mode.  They are numbered and captioned in bold above.  Table
column and row headings are centered but otherwise use the same
typography as table contents.  Table section headings (spanning all
columns) are additionally boldfaced.  In some cases, instead of
horizontal rules, they use dot leaders, or are split into five-row
groupings using whitespace.  Table borders are heavier rules.
Numerical table columns are usually decimal-point-aligned, using
lining (“capital”) figures.  Sometimes table contents are flowed
across multiple “supercolumns” separated by double vertical rules.

The mini-table of contents at the start of section 2 is split into two
columns and uses hanging indents to continue subsection names across
lines.

On p. 881 we have a tree structure depicted with braces “{” for
branching and blocks of text for the nodes.

Unidirectional arrows in diagrams are usually fletched, but not
always.  Dimension arrows are not fletched and use the long-short-long
dash pattern which to me indicates a center line.  Open-triangle
arrowheads (with a line through the middle), single-barbed arrowheads,
and open-line arrowheads both appear, but solid-triangle arrowheads do
not.

Plots of quantitative data are uniformly grid-ruled, with the rules
often broken to preserve readability of legend text that runs along a
plotted line.  In places, as on p. 584, an area of the grid is removed
to make space for a plot caption, but plots are usually just captioned
externally as figures.  Qualitative plots usually have only the axes
ruled.

### _The Book of Useful Knowledge: A Cyclopædia of Six Thousand Practical Receipts_ ###

[This book, by an Arnold James Cooley][1] (“Practical Chemist”), was
published in 1850 in New York, Philadelphia, and Cincinnati, a reprint
of the original London edition (and thus presumably done without the
consent of the author).  The full title and subtitle is “The Book of
Useful Knowledge: A Cyclopædia of Six Thousand Practical Receipts, and
Collateral Information in the Arts, Manufactures, and Trades,
including Medicine, Pharmacy, and Domestic Economy.  Designed as a
Compendious Book of Reference for the Manufacturer, Tradesman,
Amateur, and Heads of Families.”  This is centered on the title page
in somewhere between eight and twelve different fonts, one of them a
blackletter, but of course no sans-serif fonts.

[1]: https://archive.org/details/acyclopaediasix01coolgoog

The scan is, unfortunately, by Google, so the scan quality is very
poor, and I have no idea of the original physical size.

The main body of the text is a series of alphabetized entries, each
beginning with an all-caps headword, set in two columns of 68 lines
with a vertical rule between them; most paragraphs within each entry
begin with an italicized header.  Paragraphs, even the initial
paragraph of each entry, are all indented by about one em.  No leading
seems to be used.  The columns are only about 20 ems wide, and of
course are justified with heavy hyphenation.

Occasionally an entry is subdivided into sequences of paragraphs with
a centered italic header with a blank line above it.

The end of the body text is followed by the notation, centered, in
boldface, in all capitals, with extra letter-spacing, near the bottom
of the page: “THE END.”

Frequent use of italics for emphasis gives an impression of great
excitability:

> then spread it *thinly* on a dish, and expose it before the fire, or
> to a current of dry air, until nearly dry.  It will then keep for
> years in wide-mouthed bottles or pots, covered over with bladder. 
> For *use*, a little is dissolved in water.

There is extra spacing betwee sentences,
and it also uses thin spaces before the
colons and abundant semicolons and following open double- and
single-quotes, as in “do the ‘ important’ at”.

A typical entry begins:

>   ABRASION.  A superficial injury of the skin, resulting from the
> partial removal of the cuticle by friction.
>
>   *Treat.*  When the injured surface is small, and unexposed, no
> application is generally required,…

Trailing punctuation goes inside close parentheses:

> not only suffers refraction at the spherical surface, (called
> spherical aberration,) but the different colored rays, forming the
> beam of light,

Each page has a horizontal rule above its body text, above which are
the guidewords for that page (or their first three letters, at any
rate) and its page number.

Page margins are fairly generous, but column margins are quite
cramped — perhaps a single em of column separation, with that vertical
rule running down the middle of it.

Tables have horizontal rules delimiting them and separating their
header, but not separating their rows; by contrast, they separate
their columns with vertical rules, but usually have no vertical
borders.  Often table row boundaries are indicated only by braces “}”,
and intermittent dot leaders facilitate column-to-column traversal.
They are neither numbered, but sometimes captioned above.  As in the
_Standard Handbook_, tables are sometimes flowed into “supercolumns”
separated by double vertical rules.  Lining figures are used.  Decimal
points are vertically centered: “its sp. gr. about 1·069 or 1·070;”,
and numeric columns are aligned by them.

Some simpler tables (e.g., the alkaloids on p. 47) are simply two
columns of text joined by dot leaders with italic headers at the top.

In a few cases, the columns end to make room for a large table, like
the table captioned “I. *French Decimal Measures of Length*”, on
p. 419.

Text flows around small figures; large figures interrupt paragraphs.
As with tables, figures are neither numbered nor captioned, but
sometimes they include a legend set in smaller type below them.

Footnotes are set in smaller type below a horizontal rule at the
bottom of a column; they are linked with \* and †.

Hyperlinks to other Cyclopædia entries are at times merely indicated
with notations such as “, (which see.)” or even “; to each of which
the reader is referred, in their alphabetical places.”.  Small caps
are used frequently for synonyms and surnames and I think they may
also indicate hyperlinks, as they traditionally do in dictionaries:
“(See BREWING.)”  Sometimes they seem to merely indicate emphasis, as
in the bipartite name given for the almond tree.

Ordered lists are sequences of paragraphs, indented as usual by about
an em, but beginning with the ordinals “1st.”, “2d.”, “3d.”, “4th.”,
etc., or the Hindu-Arabic numerals “1.”, “2.”, “3.”, etc., or
italicized letters “*a*.”, “*b*.”, etc., or the Roman numerals “I.”,
“II.”, “III.”, etc.  Commonly these varying forms of numeration
indicate nested list structures, but no typographical cues as to the
hierarchy are visible.

Bulleted lists do not occur, though simple tables fulfill their
function.  On p. 108, for example, we have this table of plants for
attracting bees:

<table><tr><td>
<i>Shrubs, &c.</i><br />Rosemary,<br />Broom,<br />Heath,<br />Furze,<br />Fruit-blossoms. 
</td><td>
<i>Flowers.</i><br />Mignonette,<br />Lemon thyme,<br />Borage,<br />White clover,<br />Bean-flowers.
</td></tr></table>

The book uses a number of ideograms that are no longer in use,
although perhaps surprisingly, Unicode has them.  Its rendering of “%”
uses a horizontal bar, and many recipes are given in apothecaries'
weight, using lower-case
j-terminated Roman numerals, in scruples (written as “℈”, as in “℈iv”),
drachms (written “ʒ”; now often called “drams”,
though using that spelling now
implies you’re talking about avoirdupois drams),
and ounces (written “℥”).  This is explained on
p. 561.  Thus “ʒij” means “two [apothecaries’] drams”,
which is to say, a
quarter of an apothecaries’ ounce (which was the same as the troy ounce)
or 7.78 g in modern
units.
The Roman numerals here also represented ½ with “ss”.

Greek words appear commonly in the etymologies of terms, but the Greek
font used is to my eye quite poor; it has serifs, but its capital
height is just a little taller than the x-height of the Roman font
used, and its own x-height is smaller still.  Typically it is
oblique. The forms also seem somewhat crude and irregular to me, but
that may be merely an artifact of the very poor scan quality common to
Google Books scans and the small font size.

### _The Mechanism of Weaving_ ###

[This book was unfortunately scanned by Google][3], so the scan is of
extremely poor quality.

[3]: https://archive.org/details/mechanismweavin00foxgoog

Published in London in 1894 and in New York by MacMillan.  Everything
is Roman or italic except the word “London” on the title page, which
is blackletter and includes many fonts, and the lettering in the
illustrations.  Headings are all-caps, bold, centered, and at times
with extra letter-spacing.  The table of contents uses indentation to
show structure, with sparse dot leaders, as well as small caps for
top-level headings; and the index, set in two columns separated by a
vertical rule, also uses indentation to show structure.  The index has
a blank line before each new letter.

Line spacing is somewhat loose.  There are 33 lines per page.
Paragraphs are justified and indented by about two ems, except for (at
times) the first paragraph after a heading, whose first word is
instead rendered with small caps.  In one unusual case on p. 250, the
section heading begins a sentence completed in the body text; the same
thing happens with a subsection heading on p. 311.  Paragraphs are not
separated by extra leading.  There is extra spacing between sentences,
and thin spaces
before semicolons and colons and inside double quotes.  Hyphenation is
sparse, and word spacing is consequently somewhat uneven.

The text is divided into parts, which are divided into sections, which
contain subsections.  Any of these may begin in the middle of a page.
Subsection headers are in small caps of the size of the body text;
section headers are slightly larger (say 1.2× the point size), in
caps; part headers (“PART I”) are slightly larger still (say 1.5× the
point size of the body text), also in caps, with a bit of extra
letter-spacing.  All three types of headings are centered and given
extra leading, about a line’s worth; part headers have even more extra
leading above them, maybe two lines’ worth.  Subsection headers may
have a little extra leading above them, but perhaps only when preceded
by a paragraph; it varies from page to page.

Widows occur frequently, and on p. 56, there’s a totally avoidable
orphan due to placing a figure between the first line of text and the
other four lines on the page.

Illustrations are numbered below in small caps (“FIG. 1”).
Unfortunately they are rarely on the same page as the text about them,
even though text sometimes flows around them.  Italics are used in the
text for letters referencing figures, and mysteriously at the end of
the preface for the word “September”, but barely used at all for
emphasis, though occasionally for Latin phrases like *vice versa*.

Illustrations contain hand-inked letters and digits which do not have
serifs, though they are rarely monoline, so you could reasonably argue
that this book *does* include sans-serif text.  But the first
occurrence of a sans-serif letter in text as such is an “X” in the
middle of p. 138 (“fulcrumed at X”), and it happens again on p. 391,
though, as I said before, typically italic is used for this.  (Of
course, the multiplication sign × is always monoline and never has
serifs.)  You could argue that sans-serif is playing a role here
similar to the role played by typewriter text in modern texts about
programming.

(This book was printed in 1894.  Sometime between 1890 and 1898, the
Berthold Type Foundry released Akzidenz-Grotesk, one of the “German
sans-serifs” that started appearing toward the end of the 19th
century, and the first one to become popular.  But it was intended for
use in advertising rather than running text.  Wikipedia tells me that
“Egyptian”-style letters — meaning primitive monoline sans-serif
letterforms modeled after surviving inscriptions from classical Egypt
and Italy — became popular for advertising signs in England in the
late 1700s.  Caslon released his “Two Lines English Egyptian” font in
1816, but it is only known from specimen books.)

Tables have ruled borders, ruled column separators, and a rule between
the headers and the table body, with rules interrupted where they
would cross, but no ruled row separators.  They are not numbered or
captioned.  Lining figures are used in tables and text, though page
numbers use old-style figures.  Decimal points are vertically centered
(“1·125”) but vulgar fractions (“1⅛”) are used more often; inversely,
periods are used at times in formulas to indicate multiplication,
though “×” is used more often.

Tables with no rules occur occasionally as well, in the form of a
non-indented paragraph set in smaller type with extra leading above
and below, consisting of many nearly identical lines with the
identical parts replaced with ditto marks (double low 9 quotation
marks, here.)  An example is on p. 121.  In a more unusual case on
p. 264, the table has a horizontal rule and a total placed beneath it,
and the paragraph continues from there.

In one case, a numbered list (“1.”, “2.”, “3.”) is indented by the
same amount as a paragraph, but then a hanging indent is used so that
later lines in the list are indented more deeply.  They have short
vertical skips above and below them, but as with paragraphs, none
within.  In another case (p. 275–8) the list items are paragraphs
leading with a parenthesized number (“(1) Power consumed.”) which
function as headings for the following paragraphs, but are not
otherwise typographically distinguished.

Formulas, when interrupting a paragraph, are set in slightly smaller
type, but are not numbered.  Sometimes tall formulas in running text
are accommodated with more leading.

Inches are indicated by oblique double prime signs, which differ from
the “” signs used for quotes; similarly, the prime signs used to
indicate parts of figures are distinct from apostrophes.  Em dashes
are used (often immediately after colons) and almost never have spaces
around them (except once on p. 326), but en dashes are not used; on
p. 119 and p. 167 a hyphen is instead used to indicate a range of
years. (Conversely, on p. 247 there are spaces around two otherwise
ordinary hyphens, and again on p. 249 and p. 260.)  The ideogram “∴”
is used to mean “therefore”, and “a:b::c:d” is used to mean “a÷b =
c÷d”.  Arrows are extensively fletched, but otherwise the visual
language of the illustrations is quite modern — dashed lines indicate
hidden lines; gears are indicated by a circle at their pitch radius
plus dash-dot lines at their root and outermost radii; hatched
potato-chip cutaways are used to suggest round shafts; in one place a
line alternating short and long dashes indicates the line above a
center of rotation; hatches up to a line suggest a solid surface.

### First Folio _The Tragedie of Othello_ ###

Looking at [this scan from Shakespeare’s First folio from
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Othello_F1.jpg), which
is set in a Humanist roman and italic, I see vertical and horizontal
rules around the whole page.  The play’s title is split across two
page-width lines: “THE TRAGEDIE OF”, in large roman type with large
but somewhat uneven letter-spacing, and below “Othello, the Moore of
Venice”, in smaller type.  The body text is set in two columns with an
additional rule between them, mostly with a ragged right margin due to
the iambic pentameter of the text, but justified where the text runs
to longer lines.  There is a act/scene title running across both
columns, “Actus Primus.  Scœna Prima.” between horizontal rules, and
on the facing page, “Scene Secunda” is in the same italic font, with
column-wide horizontal rules above and below.  Italics are used to
distinguish characters’ names and, strangely enough, nationalities.
Spaces are somewhat uneven, but generally there is extra space after
sentence-ending periods, and spaces appear before colons, semicolons,
and question marks, though sometimes they are omitted entirely around
colons and commas.  Occasionally spaces occur inside parentheses and
occasionally not outside.  There is no boldface and of course no
sans serif.

Hyphenation is occasionally used.  The spelling and lettering is as
you’d expect for the 17th century: i/j, u/v, ſ/s are alternate forms
of the same letters governed by position, and ligatures include ff,
ſt, ct, ſh, ſſ.  (I don’t actually see any “j”s, but I assume they
would occur if a word ended in an “i”.)  On one occasion, perhaps to
save a bit of space, “my” is spelled “ỹ”.  Most nouns and occasionally
adjectives are capitalized.

“THE TRAGEDIE OF” is about four times the point size of the body text,
and “Othello, the Moore of Venice” about twice the point size of the
body text.  “Actus Primus.”, etc., is about 1.4× the point size of the
body text.  The first paragraph is begins with an ornamental capital
“N” from Rodorigo’s opening line, “NEuer tell me,I take it much
vnkindly”, which is about three and a half lines tall.

These titles have a bit of extra leading above and below: the play
title has about half a line above, half a line below its second line,
and almost a whole line below its lower line.  At times stage
directions are centered in a column, in italics, with a line of
leading above and below; other times they are simply italics on a
normally spaced line.  No extra leading is used between lines of body
text; each time a new character speaks, it begins a new indented
paragraph, again set tight with no extra leading.  There are 66 lines
per column (not counting catchwords) at the normal line height.

Wikipedia tells me that the First Folio has a page height of 320 mm.
About an eighth of that (≈40mm) is a margin at the bottom of the page,
and about another sixteenth (≈20mm) at the top, so only about 260 mm
holds those 66 lines, so the line height is about 3.9 mm, or 11
PostScript points.  Just as in _Tick, Tock_, about 9–12 words fit into
a column, when the lines aren’t being broken to fit into iambic
pentameter.

Wikipedia
---------

Wikipedia regrettably uses almost exclusively sans-serif type.
Figures are very frequent, and almost always floated right, with
captions below in the regular body text style.  My tables of contents,
like Gwern’s, are directly modeled on MediaWiki’s.  (I don't remember
if UseModWiki had them.)

Wikipedia has `border-bottom: 1px solid #a2a9b1` to underline its
`<h1>`s and `<h2>`s.  (The rule applies to other headings, but for them
it’s overridden with a `border-bottom: 0`.)  This is not entirely
unobtrusive, but it’s less obtrusive than horizontal rules in black
ink typically are in books.

They also have navigational links in the left, top, and bottom margins
of the article; these margins are a somewhat darker background color.
Category links are at the bottom of the article.  Since these margins
take up a lot of screen real estate, Wikipedia uses a totally
different style on hand computers.

Wikipedia tables have a variety of formats, but commonly
(class="wikitable") they are captioned above in bold (and not
numbered), have uniform-width rules around them, separate both rows
and columns with rules, and use a darker background (#f8f9fa) than the
surrounding text’s #fff — darker still for the headers (#eaecf0),
which are bold and centered; they have substantial padding `(padding:
0.2em 0.4em`) in the table cells.

<h2 id="gwern">Gwern</h2>

Gwern’s website is set in a serif font (body text and headers too)
with justified paragraphs, indented where they follow other paragraphs
(`p+p { text-indent: 2.5em }`); headings with some extra leading; drop
caps (in some cases, like
[magnesium](https://www.gwern.net/nootropics/Magnesium), quite
elaborate ones); no leading between paragraphs; and browser-provided
hyphenation.  Some of the headings use small caps (with
`font-feature-settings: 'smcp'`
rather than `font-variant: small-caps`), though this varies by epoch; others
use caps.  He mostly uses old-style numerals (`font-variant-numeric:
oldstyle-nums`).  These would be unremarkable choices for a book, but
on a web page they seem radical.  There is more leading above headings
than below.  He’s also using quite a number of less book-like choices:
right-aligned second-level headings (underlined in black) (though
several of the books I’ve looked at have some right-aligned headings),
darker backgrounds with borders for blockquotes, underlined links,
bulleted lists with four-pointed star bullets, varying gray levels in
text, letter-sized logotype icons inserted into text, looser line
spacing (line-height: 1.5), relatively long line length (50 ems or
so).

His `<h3>`s are a bit outdented (as well as bold and all-caps), and
his `<h4>`s are also outdented, which could in theory make them stand
out when scanning visually.

Generally there is an abstract of a few hundred words beneath the
metadata, next to the table of contents (see below), in a
double-bordered gray box, before the article proper begins.

When he has nested blockquotes, the inner one has an even darker
background than the outer one, which is achieved with a `blockquote
blockquote` rule rather than alpha-blending.  (It would appear that
his blockquotes actually alternate in color.)

He’s also using the hack mentioned earlier for underlining links:
`text-decoration: none` to disable the normal underline, then a
background image synthesized from gradients, with 12 overlaid white
text-shadows to make holes in the underline around descenders.
(This hack is unnecessary in recent versions of Chromium, which
perforate the default link underline for descenders.)

Unlike Wikipedia and Medium, he puts his category links at the top of
the article, after a brief summary paragraph in italics (a summary
rather like the extended titles in Victorian-era books, more than
100-word abstracts of modern research papers).

Often Gwern captions his figures below in bold, with
syntax-highlighted source code above (generally R with ggplot,
sometimes Haskell, sometimes CSV); the source code plays the role of
equations, but it is not centered; instead it is formatted as is
conventional for source code, except on a light grey (#fafafa)
background with a box around it (and limited in height, with
scrollbars for overflow).  On the occasions when he does use
equations, they are typically done with MathJax (including its fonts:
MJXc-TeX-math-Iw sure gives nice italics, and it seems to be 19K), and
when they are not inline, they are centered with 1.25 ems of leading
(`margin: 1.25em auto`), which I think may be MathJax’s default.  (See
file `dercuano-formula-display` for my thoughts on what to do for
this.)

In the rare case where Gwern has tables, they are very fancy indeed,
with an italic centered caption at the top with heavy rules above and
below (matching a heavy rule at the bottom of the table) with half a
line or so of leading, bold column headers with sorting buttons in
them (switching from black-on-white to text-shadowed white-on-blue
when activated), alternating light-gray and white row backgrounds with
a smaller font size, and about half a line of leading above and below
data rows (`padding: 7px 10px`) except in very long tables, and a
short gap (≈2px) in the gray background between columns.  Additional
mouseover handlers add dotted outlines to table rows and light-blue
background to table headers.  The sorting (and probably the
mouseovers) is done with something called tablesorter.js via jQuery.
The only real imperfections are that the sorting defaults to
ascending, the table headers can scroll out of view, and numeric
columns are left-aligned (but correctly sorted numerically!)  He’s
using `font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums` but I think I’d prefer the
old-style numbers.

For headers and body text, he uses Source Serif Pro (by Frank
Grießhammer, licensed under the SIL OFL by Adobe in 2014; it’s 72
kilobytes, though that seems to be just ASCII and an accent or two,
and it’s just the Roman; the italic is another 38K, and there are
seven more variants), falling back to Baskerville or Libre
Baskerville; for source code, Liberation Mono, falling back to
Consolas or even Courier.  The roman Source Serif Pro is very nice,
but its italic is insufficiently italic for my tastes, more like a
oblique/italic hybrid.  Actually, I’m not totally sure his italic font
doesn’t vary from article to article.

His tables of contents are similar to mine, but he flows the text
around them, and uses varying text weights, sizes, and colors to
distinguish importance levels — outline numbers are in light grey,
text in a lighter grey.  He does use sans-serif fonts for the table of
contents.

Eccentrically, he adds a light gray background to `<q>`s.

[Fernando Irarrázaval’s blog]
-----------------------------

Fernando Irarrázaval has a very pretty blog.  He’s using ET Book (it’s
where I first saw it), falling back to Palatino for characters like
_**∞**_, and he has a .newthought class to make the first word of a
blog post small-caps and half a magstep larger (1.4 rem, while the
body text is 1.2 rem).  He takes advantage of the ample margins on
modern screens to replace “footnotes” with “sidenotes” in the margin,
in smaller text (1 rem), with the numbers in red ink.  (The ample
margins are due to the fact that they basically don’t support
multi-column text.  I don’t know what his hand computer strategy is;
hand computers barely have enough room for a single column.)  Source
code blocks have a light grey background, and syntax highlighting done
server-side with Pygments.  As you’d expect from a Tufte fan, tables
have a single thin rule separating headers from body.  Figures are
centered but sometimes are “captioned” in the margin to the right, as
well as having source code above.  His `<ul>`s are without bullets,
but with plenty of whitespace, to the point of having uncomfortably
short line lengths.

Firefox default styles
----------------------

Firefox’s default for body text on my laptop is 16 pixels with
font-weight 400, for `<h1>` it’s 32 pixels with font-weight 700, and
for `<h2>` it’s 24 pixels with font-weight 700.

As I said before, my pixels are about 161 μm, so 16 pixels is 7.3
points, which seems pretty small to me.  The 14.5 points at which
_T<sub>E</sub>X_ is set seems more reasonable, and the 19 points to
which I had it zoomed is eminently readable.

Firefox’s default margins for `<h2>` etc. are equal on top and bottom,
which is semantically wrong, though it duplicates formatting
that is common with T<sub>E</sub>X; headings belong to the text below them,
not the text above them.  Right now I have an `<h2>` with 29.6px
margin-bottom and a font-size of 35.7px, and an `<h3>` with 29.4px
margin-bottom and a font-size of 29.4px.  And the `<h1>` on top of
everything has a 28.1px margin-bottom and a font-size of 42px.

Typewriter type
---------------

One complicating factor is that I use Markdown’s typewriter type `<pre>`
fairly often to “quote” things from character-cell terminals, which
normally have at least 80 columns.  It would be nice for those quotes
to fit into the column.  Here’s an 80-column box:

    0123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789
    |                                                                              |
    0123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789 123456789

If that doesn’t fit nicely into the column of text, the aesthetic
experience is suboptimal.  With a max-width of 40em and the same font
size among the paragraph text and the typewriter text it only fits up
to about column 66, so I need about 21% more width, or 17.5% less,
from the other point of view.  Right now, I’m using 21-pixel body
text, which is pretty ideal from a readability point of view.  I
should be able to make a reasonable compromise and get things to fit:
6.6% larger body text, 6.6% longer lines, and 6.2% smaller typewriter
text; that works out to about 43em width, 22px body text, and 19px
typewriter text, giving a total compression of 24.5%.

That worked nicely!  And 22 pixels (which Firefox is indeed
interpreting as 22 of the literal screen pixels) is still only 10
points on my screen, and I still get 25 or 30 lines in the browser
window, so the larger size doesn’t compromise readability.

Later I switched this to “80%” and applied it to `<code>` too, because
once I switched to the old-style ET Book font with its small x-height,
the much larger x-height of DejaVu Sans Mono made it jump out of lines
unpleasantly.  80% works out to 18px rather than 19px at the default
font size of 22px; at the new larger 26px size, it’s 21px.

A possible tweak might be to add 10% (I don’t know, 0.03em or so) of
letter-spacing to body text to reduce the number of words per line,
since at 43em it’s a bit longer than I think is ideal.

Looser letter spacing
---------------------

As Aristotle Pagaltzis taught me, to some extent, we can trade off
text size against letter spacing; one of the bottlenecks in reading is
apparently the crowding of information per unit area in the fovea.  So
text can be hard to read because, although each letterform is
individually fine, there are too many of them in too little space.
This means that if you shrink the letterforms but leave them at the
same number of letters per square inch, you can maintain the same
readability, up to a point.

I may try this with the body text: add an extra 10% letter-spacing and
line-height and reduce the font-size by a corresponding 9.1%.

As it says in _The Palmer Method_ I examined:

> [S]tudents sometimes think that large figures are necessarily
> plainer, but such is not the case.  Examine carefully the diagram.
> At the left are figures that are absolutely plain; one could not be
> mistaken for another, and yet their extreme size in the small spaces
> makes them difficult to read.  At the right are the same figures, no
> more perfect, but not so large.  Please note carefully that these,
> surrounded by white paper, and much smaller, are more legible, even
> at a distance, than the large figures at the left.

I tried that, and also a more extreme version where I changed
max-width from 45em to 54em, the font-size from 22px to 18.3px, the
line-height from 1.4 to 1.68, and added .2em of letter-spacing.  The
result still took up about the same space and was still readable from
the same distance as the normal text, but it feels noticeably less
comfortable.  Instead of spacious, it feels fussy.  The looser
line-spacing does seem like an improvement, so I increased it to 1.5.

Smaller headings
----------------

Since yesterday I’ve been using these sizes, which closely coincide
with the size hierarchy from _The Grammar of Graphics_:

    h1 { font-size: 2em }
    h2 { font-size: 1.7em }
    h3 { font-size: 1.4em }
    h4 { font-size: 1.2em }
    h5 { font-size: 1.1em }
    h6 { font-size: 1em }

However, because most articles only use a single `<h1>` and some
`<h2>`s and occasionally an `<h3>`, most headings are 1.7em and 1.4em,
which is a bit large.  Since I’m using a sans-serif font for all the
headings (except `<h1>`), there’s little danger they’ll blend into the
body text in any case, so perhaps I should make the last three levels
the same size as the body text, distinguished only with different
typography (say, bold, roman, and italic), permitting the use of sizes
like 1.4em and 1.2em for `<h2>` and `<h3>`.

(At the moment, actually, only `low-power-micros` even used `<h5>`,
and it only does so once; nothing used `<h6>`.)

So that’s how I ended up with these somewhat less extreme font styles for
headings:

    h1 { font-size: 2em }
    h2 { font-size: 1.59em }
    h3 { font-size: 1.26em }
    h4, h5, h6 { font-size: 1em }
    h4 { font-weight: bold; font-style: italic }
    h5 { font-weight: normal; font-style: italic }
    h6 { font-weight: normal; font-style: normal }
    h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 { font-family: Helvetica,Arial,sans-serif }

Later, after spending probably an unhealthy amount of time looking at
medieval manuscripts, incunabulae, and other printed books (from many
centuries), I switched to using serif fonts for headers, just with
small caps, extra letter-spacing, and red ink to make them stand out.
(I’m not daring enough to use the #c54 kinds of bright reds used for
headings and other rubrication in incunabulae and medieval
manuscripts, but #600 seems like it should work.)

Here’s the current cascade from `<h3>` on down, with some sample body
text I didn’t write:

### Waltz, nymph, for quick jigs vex Bud `<h3>` ###

He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five
on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the
burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to
wash in.

#### Waltz, nymph, for quick jigs vex Bud `<h4>` ####

And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the
sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays:

##### Waltz, nymph, for quick jigs vex Bud `<h5>` #####

And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven.

###### Waltz, nymph, for quick jigs vex Bud `<h6>` ######

The hand of the LORD was upon me, and carried me out in the
spirit of the LORD, and set me down in the midst of the valley which
was full of bones,
