In cybernetics, hierarchical control systems have a “higher-level”
control system which provides set points to (possibly multiple)
“lower-level” control systems, which the lower-level systems then
seek.  For example, a reaction-wheel-robot attitude-control system
might plan a maneuver and then command reaction-wheel control systems
to seek particular velocities for their respective reaction wheels.

It occurs to me that under some circumstances it makes sense to send
more than just a set point.  For example, if the central control
system for a robot arm commands the servo in each of its joints to a
particular position, the force the servo applies to reach that
position will depend on the difficulty of the movement — the
mechanical impedance, as they say, and may reach a very high level if
unexpected impedance is encountered, perhaps because a research
assistant’s head is unexpectedly in the way of the arm.  It is
possible for the central control system to pay attention to these
error signals and send new commands under those circumstances, but
this puts stringent demands on the response time of the central
control system.

It might make more sense to command the lower-level control with not
just a set point but also a gradient, including a derivative with
respective to any of a variety of variables — in the above case, it
might be the force.  In particular, the derivative of position with
respect to force is simply the mechanical compliance, so this amounts
to commanding not just a position but also a compliance.

Under some circumstances the commanded compliance (or other analogous
gradient) would be achieved by electronic or other active feedback
control — position sensors feeding back to motor-control systems, for
example — but in other cases it could be achieved wholly or partly
through passive means.

For example, a “brushless DC motor” or a stepper motor has a variable
stationary holding torque determined by the armature current when the
motor is stopped; moreover, an analogous kind of control is possible
when the motor is moving as well by controlling what percentage of the
time the windings are carrying current that tends to slow down the
rotation rather than no current; and a tendon-actuated system, such as
parts of the humans’ bodies, will be stiffer when both the extensor
and retractor tendons are under tension (“muscle tone”) than when both
of them are relaxed.

In other cases, mechanical compliance can be usefully altered by
taking advantage of redundant degrees of control.  Holding chopsticks
close to the base rather than close to the tip, for example, is a
technique for increasing mechanical compliance and thus making it
easier to pick up food.

In an electronic context, this “variable compliance” might amount to
things like a varying gain on an amplifier, a variable DC bias on a
varactor, or a bias current on a secondary winding that varies the
permeability of a magnetic core, as in a magamp.

The variables whose values the lower-level control uses to perturb the
set point are not necessarily directly related to the control
mechanism.  For example, it sometimes makes sense for a hand computer
display to brighten when the hand computer senses increased ambient
light, even if the human using it doesn’t command it to brighten; a
quadcopter rotor might reduce the setpoint of its speed if a local
accelerometer indicates that it’s accelerating upwards; and so on.  In
general, the idea is for the lower-level control loop to have a set
point that is a locally-linear approximation to the potentially more
complex and time-varying function used by the higher-level loop to
figure out what set point to send to the lower-level loop.

It is observable that the humans use mechanisms such as these at
several levels in their motor control; this is demonstrated, for
example, by attempting to use a mouse rotated 180° or to write legibly
in a mirror.

Controlling the gradients of such “reflexive” low-level control loops
can dramatically reduce the demands on the high-level control, in
particular often permitting much higher communication and processing
latency before the whole system begins to unintentionally oscillate.
Also, it can allow the high-level control loop to send commands that
suppress, excite, or control oscillations in the lower-level control
loop (such as human voices producing higher pitches and the humans
doing that freaky thing where they vibrate their eye irises sideways),
also reducing the demands on the stability of that lower-level control
loop.

Beyond just the gradient of the set point, it might make sense for the
high-level control loop to alter other parameters of the low-level
control loop; for example, if it’s a PID controller, it might make
sense to alter the gains of the P, I, and D components depending on
circumstances.  With modern electronics it is possible to get
subnanosecond response times from analog electronic control loops and
trivial to get submicrosecond response times.

Note that a PD controller (a PID controller with no I term) will also
perturb its operating point according to the plant’s
response — linearly so if the plant is linear — and this can limit the
force the robot arm exerts on the research assistant’s head.  So in a
sense this is a special case of the more general concept I’m
describing; but it is missing the crucial ability for the higher-level
control loop to set the compliance separately from the set point, and
it can only work at all in that context if the robot actuator is
working against a spring or something.

It isn’t necessary for the lower-level setpoint perturbation to be
linear.  It might be whatever nonlinear function is most convenient to
compute (for example, using the exponential Ebers–Moll response of
BJTs) or it might be a precision higher-degree approximation, as in
mechanical naval fire control computers.
