High-speed analog-to-digital conversion is very difficult, so a common
way to make high-speed oscilloscopes is to store the signal after the
trigger in an analog form for long enough to analyze it at leisure.
This is of course a description of how entirely-analog oscilloscopes
work, but for example a multi-gigahertz digital oscilloscope vendor in
the early 1990s told me his scope stored the data in an internal
CRT — a sort of analog version of the Williams tube — until it had
time to analyze it.

Oscilloscopes are a particularly tricky kind of thing to build out of
random electronic crap you find in the junk pile because that crap
typically doesn't include any ADCs over 10Msps (some scanners contain
6Msps ADCs), and you really need at least 40Msps or 60Msps for an
entry-level 20MHz oscilloscope.  (Keep in mind that an analog 20MHz
oscilloscope isn’t incapable of viewing signals above 20MHz; that’s
just its 3dB attenuation frequency.  Sub-nanosecond signals will
probably be phase-shifted and badly attenuated but they’ll still be
there.)

So it occurred to me that maybe a discarded obsolete hard disk could
bridge this gap.  Suppose we’re talking about a current 15krpm Seagate
Cheetah with its 204MB/s data transfer rate, which (if it’s on one
head) implies that the waveform at the disk surface includes
significant, reliably recoverable components at up to 800MHz.  The
disk is rotating at 250Hz.  Once a waveform is recorded, it is then
repeated at the read head over and over again, every 4 milliseconds,
until either the head is moved to another track or a new waveform is
recorded.  We have 4 milliseconds of waveform recorded, which would
amount to 3.3 million cycles of the highest frequencies recorded and
could thus be fully digitized in about a second using the 6Msps
scanner ADCs I mentioned earlier; but in a much more typical case, you
only care about a few hundred or thousand sample points after the
trigger event.  And you can digitize a few of them on every revolution
until you have them all digitized.

Considering digitizing 1000 points at 40 million samples per second,
well, that’s 25 microseconds, which is 150 samples at 6 megasamples
per second.  You can digitize points #0, #7, #14, #21, and so on on
the first revolution of the disk; #1, #8, #15, #22, etc., on the
second; and in this way after 7 revolutions of the disk (28 ms) you
have digitized the whole event.  Digitizing at higher effective sample
rates, or using a slower ADC, would require proportionally more
revolutions.

Even ordinary disks (5400 rpm, 50 MB/s) should still be capable of
functioning effectively in this role.

A problem with this pretty picture is that disks are not really
designed for analog signal integrity, and so the signal may be
corrupted with noise and subject to hard-to-characterize
nonlinearities.  And of course you need to degauss the track before
recording small analog signals on it.

(See also files `tv-oscilloscope`, `vcr-oscilloscope`,
`laser-printer-oscilloscope`, and `ccd-oscilloscope`.)