I want a new computing environment for reading writing, including
reading, writing, and remixing computational models, that cleanly
virtualizes the computer.

The ideal is something like this.

I sit down at a random untrusted computer and load up the virtual
machine, as a web page or whatever, and type in an unspoofable
identifier of the mutable information space I want to look at, maybe
something like “lotus-marc-fix-kev-homes-vii-taps-car” or
“dnbwalalhcsmgsnsspdyq”.  Immediately I see a display of that
information space, loaded from a decentralized network of servers, and
an unspoofable identifier for my session, which I write down on paper.
I can start writing down my thoughts, using the keyboard or whatever,
with an instantly accessible and reliably responsive user interface,
taking advantage of the keyboard, mouse, tablet, webcam, or other
peripherals available on the untrusted computer.  As I assemble
computational models, they are executed immediately on this local
machine, but everything I create is snapshotted periodically and
propagated out to the network within less than a minute, retrievable
later by the session identifier.  All of the information I see, too,
is permanently snapshotted by the network, so that I can come back and
refer to it later.  At the end of my session, I generate an
unspoofable identifier for the state at the end of the session, and I
write it, too, down on paper.

Later, using a trusted but much less capable computer, such as my
cellphone, I retrieve the data for the session identifier; I can see
everything I created during the session, and it is certain to work
compatibly there.  I can look at the things I created, and if they are
good, I can update my published information space with them.

Compatibility into the far future and past is guaranteed by the design
of the system: if the needed data is preserved, a simple virtual
machine suffices to bring it back to life.  In addition to recording
decoders in a format that can be run efficiently on a simple virtual
machine, the original data itself is recorded in simple, general
formats like ASCII text, STL files, CSV files, and uncompressed
bitmaps, simplifying putting it to new uses in the future.  Code and
other original data have their integrity checked using a Merkle DAG;
the hash of mutable data is authenticated by using a public-key
signature.

Code is deterministic, so that executing the same code with the same
data as input will always produce the same output data.  Non-original
data produced by executing code with data as input is thus cacheable
in the same content-addressable store decentralized network; cache
services store (code hash, input data hash, output data hash) tuples,
so that if you trust everyone with write access to a cache, you can
omit redundant computation.  Trees of such tuples are published in the
same network, its hash being authenticated by the public-key signature
of the caching service itself.

Decoders and editors for crucial formats are accompanied by formal
proofs of correctness, of worst-case execution time, and of worst-case
execution space.  This is achieved by writing them originally in a
formally tractable source language, making the proofs tractable at the
source-code level, and then mechanically translating the proofs into
proofs at the level of the virtual-machine code, which can be
machine-checked without reference to the correctness of the compiler.

In addition to the content-hash-addressable immutable blob data store
and the public-key-hash-addressable mutable data store, the system
contains two additional communication services: one for reliably
passing streams of authenticated messages between mutually consenting
communicating correspondents identified by per-connection public keys,
and an unauthenticated and unreliable publish-subscribe system for
initially establishing contact between parties that don’t have a
pre-existing relationship.

Interactive user interfaces are specified by a state transition
function, which takes as input the current user interface state and an
event (which may be a keystroke, a multitouch notification, a webcam
frame, a mouse motion, a network message, a timeout, a random number,
or a few other things) and produces as output the new user interface
state and a possibly empty set of actions to take, which may include
updating a screen, playing a sound, scheduling a timeout, publishing a
blob, publishing an update to mutable data, sending a message to a
correspondent, publishing a message, subscribing to a topic, and
requesting a random number.  They are, it should be clear, composable
from simpler user interfaces using the same interface or a simpler
interface.  For example, many games can perform adequately if given
the controller state 30 or 60 times a second and producing a frame of
output. XXX does the deterministic computation thing interfere with
responsiveness?  It would seem to make it impossible to update the
rest of the screen while you’re trying to deliver updates to a slow
program.

Farming out computation to a cluster, if you trust it, is easily
accomplished by sending the (code hash, input data hash) commands you
want to execute to it, and arranging for the cluster coordinator to
send you the final cacheable tuple when it finishes.  For many uses,
this also requires sharing a cache with the coordinator that you can
trust not to leak secret data.

The virtual machine on which the code runs has this command-sending as
a fundamental operation: any program running on it can submit (code,
input) commands for execution, which may be transparently satisfied
from cache, by local execution, or by farming out to a cluster.  XXX
Perhaps this shouldn’t be a fundamental operation, both because you
might want to change it and because it could make proofs of efficiency
very difficult; but that just means that the computation producing an
output needs to be able to delegate that responsibility to a future
computation composed from commands it spawns, which might come to the
same thing in the end.

Programs manipulate the hashes through handles that are opaque to
them; rather than being contained in the code itself, they are listed
in a manifest associated with the code.  Similarly, plain data
containing a reference to other plain data lists its hash in an
associated manifest.  The hashes in the manifest have associated types
which restrict what kinds of references can be made to them: an image
transcluded in a hypermedia document has the type “dependency”
associated with its hash in the manifest, while a hypertext link has
the type “reference” associated with it.

These link types allow archive-auditing systems to verify that all of
the dependencies of a document are included on an archival medium or
stored in the network with an acceptable degree of redundancy, without
having to understand not-yet-invented hypermedia data formats.

Computation-cache services can also publish the estimated cost to
recompute derived data, based on how long it took last time.  This
aids cooperating data-cache services in choosing which data to throw
away.