I use a sort of log-structured filesystem for my notebooks.  I fill
the notebooks in chronological order (more or less) from the second
page to the last page.  (The first page is left blank at first.)
Everything is under some heading; the current heading is repeated at
the top of every page, with the date, but sometimes there are several
headings on a single page.  The headings are underlined so they're
easy to see looking at the page.

So I can find things by paging through the recent pages and looking at
the headings.  When that gets to be too much, I append a new "table of
previous contents" section, under a heading just like everything else;
it lists all the headings, with dates, since the last "table of
previous contents".  The first page contains a list of tables of
previous contents, with their dates, so that I can find them
relatively quickly.  This allows me to find my notes more quickly by
reading through the few pages that are full of tables of previous
contents, rather than leafing through all the pages in the book
looking for headings.

If I were a disk, which I'm not, this would be a reasonably efficient
scheme for writes: regardless of how much stuff I have to write, I
could append it all in a single write to the end of the
currently-written data, possibly including a new table of previous
contents, then update the "superblock" on the first page with a
pointer to the new table.  So writing any amount of data less than a
notebookfull requires a seek to the end of the previous ToC, possibly
a read of data following it, a write of the new data, and possibly a
second seek and a second write to the superblock.  Two seeks.  Finding
something in a notebook with three ToCs requires at most four seeks:
one to each ToC, then another one to the data; if it's not listed in
any ToC, you can sequentially scan for it after the last ToC.

With this scheme, there's a tradeoff (for either humans or for disks)
between the amount of sequential scanning you may have to do (due to
still-unrubricated items) and the number of ToCs you may have to seek
to and read.

Beatrice pointed out the other day that it would be easier for a human
to write the notes sequentially from the beginning of the book, while
writing the ToC entries sequentially from the end of the book.  This
way, all the ToC entries are in a single sequential chunk, the
tradeoff between maximum sequential scan length and ToC fragmentation
is eliminated, and writing still requires only two seeks.

Of course she is correct, and this might be a reasonable strategy for
log-structured filesystems too, although there are usually more levels
of indirection: from superblock, through various levels of inodes and
directories, to the actual file extents on disk.  You could probably
do a reasonable job by putting a B-tree of pathnames at a fixed
location of the disk, and putting the inodes and data extents
contiguously somewhere else.  `/var/cache/locate/locatedb` is a
reasonable approximation of the contents of this B-tree; on my current
laptop, it's 5.3MB, indexing 95GB of files using 596 662 inodes
(i.e. 596 662 files, although `sudo locate / | wc -l` only finds 
494 488 files.).

Repacking a 5-20MB B-tree when it got too large and loose would take a
significant fraction of a second on a modern disk, but on my laptop
would take perhaps 10-20 seconds, due to the slowness of on-CPU disk
encryption.  So it might be better to defragment the tree incrementally.

