A text editor buffer is a potentially very large mutable string which
you may want to make persistent, in the sense of storing to disk.  One
engineering problem, a less serious one than it once was, is how to
implement this data structure efficiently, given that it needs to
efficiently support arbitrary insertion and deletion, string search
near the cursor, reading the region near the cursor, and moving the
cursor to previous (or arbitrary) positions.

Text editor buffers also often contain associated metadata, including
“markers” that you can efficiently jump the cursor to, which stay with
the text they are attached to even when there are insertions and
deletions elsewhere in the buffer.  This means it is not sufficient to
merely store an integer offset into the buffer as a marker; you must,
at least, update that offset when there are insertions or deletions
before it.  There may be a pretty large number of markers, like, one
per 16 bytes or so.  You probably also need to be able to find the
markers in a region of the buffer, like, for the purpose of storing
line numbers.  (Emacs markers only offer a subset of this
functionality, because other primitives offer the other parts of it.)

This is also a reasonable description of the functionality a
filesystem must provide, except that filesystems often do not support
insertion and deletion in the middle of files efficiently.  Nearly
all, however, support appending to the end of files.

You could imagine a software system that elided these distinctions to
some degree — where all your data was, conceptually, in a single
sequence, into which you could insert data at any location, and which
you could search through with impunity.  Maybe you could even make it
more efficient than current systems.

A byte array
------------

The simplest data structure here is simply a contiguous byte array,
reallocated when growing is needed.  This used to be unusably slow,
but now [CPUs can `memmove()` 5 gigabytes per second][0], so now
you’re doing OK up to about 100 megabytes without doing anything
special — you can `memmove()` 100 megabytes after every keystroke with
barely detectable latency.

[0]: http://nadeausoftware.com/articles/2012/05/c_c_tip_how_copy_memory_quickly#Benchmarkresultsndashcompiledwithoptimizations

Gap buffers
-----------

A refinement of the raw byte array approach is the “[gap buffer][1]”
approach, used by Emacs, where you leave a gap in the middle of the
array where the cursor is.  Moving the cursor (or, rather, inserting
or deleting text in a new location) involves moving the gap, or rather
moving text from one side of the gap to the other, but inserting or
deleting text at the gap generally just involves adjusting the gap
size.  This means you only have to `memmove()` the 100 megabytes after
every thousandth keystroke or whatever.  (At the moment, my Emacs
buffer gap is 1737 bytes.)  This is [quite fast][2], and it’s [from
the at least 1970s][3] (and may date back to Expensive Typewriter),
although in the 197s0 it was 80 kilobytes instead of 100 megabytes
that you could move without the user getting annoyed.

[1]: http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/elisp/Buffer-Gap.html
[2]: http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2009/02/18/gap-buffers-or-why-bother-with-1/
[3]: http://www.finseth.com/craft/#c6.4.3

As usual with things that are amortized cheap but occasionally
expensive, you can make gap movement incremental at the cost of more
memory usage and complexity.  You need to keep track of a set of edits
pending integration into the buffer (because the gap hasn’t reached
them yet), move the gap incrementally towards those edits (during idle
time and during each keystroke), and include special cases in anything
that *reads* the buffer to check the edits-pending-integration.
Nobody does this, because instead they break things up into smaller
pieces:

A single level of indirection
-----------------------------

Supposing that your 100 megabytes or whatever are not enough (I have
16 gigabytes of RAM on my laptop, and plenty of files bigger than
that).  The next thing to try is to divide the buffer into a linear
sequence of pieces, managed with, say, an array of pointers, or an
array of structs.  (For example, each piece’s struct might contain a
start pointer, a gap start offset, a gap end offset, and a total
length.  On a 64-bit machine, it would be reasonable for the first to
be 8 bytes and the others to be 4 bytes, for a total of 24 bytes with
padding.)

This is basically what the STL deque class does.  It’s also the
approach taken by Finseth’s editor Mince.

How many pieces to use?  The general rule for this kind of thing is
that you can reduce things that take O(N) work to O(√N) by dividing
them into O(√N) pieces, so that the indirection table is about the
same size as the pieces.  In this case, if you have, say, a
128-gibibyte buffer, you could divide it into 2-mebibyte pieces, and
there will be 65536 of them, and so your array of piece descriptors
will take up about 1.5 mebibytes.  This means that moving the buffer
gap in any one of the pieces will take at most (2 mebibytes /
5 gigabytes per second) ≈ 0.4ms; moving a piece will take the same;
and splitting a piece additionally involves inserting into the middle
of that 65536-item array, which could take up to another 0.3ms or so.
So the worst case is 0.7ms, and the average case (assuming the gap
moves randomly) is half of that.

This is more or less the optimum piece size for this size of buffer.
If you use smaller pieces, like 1 mebibyte, then moving the gap in a
piece or splitting a piece will take less time, but updating the
indirection array will take more time — a total of 0.8ms worst-case in
that case.  If you use larger pieces, like 4 mebibytes, updating the
indirection array will take less time, but splitting the piece or
moving it will take more time — a total of about 1ms worst-case in
this case.  Both of these numbers are worse than 0.7ms, but the
threshold where this starts to matter to interactive response is where
it becomes a significant fraction of a 17ms screen refresh.

Probably splitting pieces is much less common than moving the buffer
gap a long way, so you might want to use somewhat smaller pieces in
the interest of improving average-case response at the expense of
worst-case response.

You can, of course, divide smaller buffers into smaller pieces.

If you’re dealing with on-disk data instead of in-RAM data, you have
to deal with both lower data rates and high latency.  Reading or
writing 2 mebibytes of data on spinning rust takes about 35ms, and
seeking to it takes another 8ms or so, so the piece-splitting
operation mentioned above that takes 0.7ms in RAM might take 90ms on
spinning rust.  Worse, some disks are bigger than 128 gibibytes.

To deal with that kind of horror without nosing up into
human-detectable operation times, we need to do better than O(√N).  We
need O(log N), and for that we need multiple levels of indirection:

B-trees, or multiple levels of indirection
------------------------------------------

B-trees are usually explained as an N-ary version of balanced binary
search trees, a kind of ordered dictionary that’s more amenable to
sequential access than red-black trees and whatnot.  But you can also
use them for things that are just plain sequences.  Each child pointer
carries with it the total length of the sequence below it, so that you
can index through the child pointers of a node until you find the
pointer that contains the position you’re interested in.

How many levels do you need?  For spinning-rust usage, you probably
want your B-tree nodes to be around half a mebibyte (so that you don’t
waste most of your time waiting for the head to seek to them); if your
pointers and sizes are 40 bits, then a node holds about 48000
pointers, for about 23.4 gibibytes of child nodes, or 1.17 tebibytes
of grandchild nodes.  So basically with *two* levels of indirection
you can get anything in two seeks and insert anywhere in three seeks
and a mebibyte and a half.

For in-RAM usage, like for a traditional editor buffer, you probably
want a lower branching factor and correspondingly deeper tree.  For
example, if we take our node size to be nominally 512 bytes and
pointers to be 8 bytes, then our nodes have 64-way branching, or
32-way if they include the child weights.  128 gibibytes of buffer is
256 mebi-leafnodes, so you have up to five levels of branching, and
about 1/31 of your RAM is taken up by internal nodes.

The leafnodes could still, if you wish, use buffer gaps.  But it’s no
longer essential.  Copying up to 512 bytes after every keystroke (and
updating up to six ancestor weights) is not very expensive.

For more usual buffer sizes, you need less levels of indirection.  8
megabytes is only 16 kibi-leafnodes, so 528 internal nodes in a
three-level tree suffices.

Compressed RAM
--------------

With the increasing gap between RAM speed and CPU speed, and the
advent of new very-high-speed compression algorithms like LZ4, it’s
becoming reasonable to compress in-RAM data that isn’t immediately
being used; it’s often faster to spend the CPU to decompress it than
it is to take the locality hit of copying it from main memory.

Ropes
-----

You’ll note in the discussion about on-disk data structures that there
was little discussion of locality of reference for writing, no
discussion of fragmentation, and no discussion of crash recovery.  We
blithely assumed that updating in place presented no problems.
Similarly, in the discussion of updating ancestor weights in RAM,
there was no discussion of concurrency.  And undo, of course, was
taken for granted.

In practice, of course, these problems are ubiquitous.  One way to
solve them (at the cost of unpredictable memory usage) is to *never
modify data in place*: instead, always write new copies of the data,
and eventually garbage-collect the old data once it’s no longer used.
This makes your data structures “persistent” in the
functional-programming sense — you can reference their old state
simply by keeping a reference to it, which makes undo quite
simple — and allows you to choose where to write the updates to, which
helps with fragmentation and write bandwidth.  This is the approach
behind the NetApp WAFL, behind Ousterhout’s Berkeley LFS, and also
behind the “[rope][5]” data structure from Xerox PARC’s Cedar, which
made its way into the SGI STL in a reference-counted form.

[5]: http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2009/01/26/ropes-twining-together-strings/

If you strictly follow these rules for B-trees, every byte you insert
or delete involves creating a whole new set of treenodes up to the
root.  In our 128-gibibyte-buffer-with-six-levels-of-treenodes case,
this is 3 kibibytes of data — plenty fast enough for keystroke
response, but 3072 times bigger than the keystroke being written.
It’s going to give your garbage collector a headache, even though it
won’t trip any write barriers.  There are a variety of different ways
of solving this, including [zippers][4].

[4]: http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2010/01/13/zippers-making-functional-upda/

The standard rope approach to this is to use unbalanced binary trees
rather than B-trees, so that you only need a couple of small treenodes
gluing together the parts of your buffer you aren’t editing with the
new string you’re inserting.  This way you need, say, 40 bytes of
freshly allocated data to record each new keystroke, instead of 3072.

One of the simplest approaches, though, is to batch up a pending
update until it’s big enough to be worth it.

Update logs
-----------

In transaction processing, this is sometimes called a “side file”: you
log the inserts, updates, and deletes in a small file “to the side of”
your main database.  Any query must take care to ensure that its
results take the changes in the side file into account, which
typically involves traversing the side file sequentially; or you can
maintain an updated version of the relevant part of the database in
non-immutable memory.

This is more or less the approach that WAFL originally took to keep
its disk write bandwidth manageable: it would buffer changes (in
battery-backed RAM) until the once-per-second timer fired and it wrote
a snapshot to disk.

In the case of a text editor, it would seem that a gap-buffer
representation for the particular part of the buffer you’re currently
modifying should enable modification to proceed with very high
efficiency; once the modifications are complete and you move
elsewhere, they could be recorded in new B-tree nodes.

Markers
-------

All of the above, however, disregards the problem of markers.  If you
have 128 gibibytes of text in your editor buffer, you might have 8
gibi-markers.  It’s no good if adding a character to your 512-byte
leafnode is efficient if that requires you to increment 4 billion
markers!

It’s not obvious how to solve this problem scalably.  But there is a
way.

If you take the Mince approach, an array of separate 2-mebibyte
gap-buffer pieces, maybe you could associate a separate marker table
with each piece, containing the marker’s physical position in that
piece.  This requires up to 65536 lookups to find a marker, and
updating up to 131072 marks when the gap moves.  (You’d probably want
to doubly-index the marker table so that you can usually update
fewer.)  These sound like ridiculous numbers, but they’re probably in
the same ballpark as the cost of moving the gap normally.

In a mutable B-tree, though, there’s a much more interesting
possibility.  Suppose a mark stores the addresses of all six of the
nodes on its path down from the root, plus the byte offset into the
leaf node.  A mutation to nodes on that path might alter the offset
within the node at which the pointer to the child is found, but it
won’t alter the value of that child pointer, so the mark remains
valid.  Only if the leaf node is mutated, or if a node it traverses is
split so that the child is no longer present, will the mark need
updating.  And we could index the marks by these addresses so that we
can find the marks that need updating when we’re splitting a node.

We could go further, though.  Suppose every node has a parent pointer.
Now, the mark can simply consist of a pointer to the leaf node that it
points into and an offset into that leaf node, and that leaf node can
have a list of marks associated with it.  No mutations higher in the
tree will require updating the mark; updating the leaf node may
require updating the mark, but finding it is easy.

This is THE SOLUTION to the scalable editor buffer problem.