From a materials-engineering point of view, one of the great benefits
of organic and biological materials is their elasticity.  Of course,
organic elastomers like polyisoprene (the largest component of natural
rubber latex), high-molecular-weight polydimethylsiloxane (silicone
rubber), and polyurethane exhibit the most extreme elasticity, with
elastic (or quasielastic) strains† sometimes exceeding 1000%; but other
organic polymers have viscoelastic behavior above their glass
transition temperatures, which are often quite low, making them very
resistant to shattering in everyday use and often capable of elastic
strains over 10% and even larger ductile strains.  By contrast, common
metals are limited to elastic strains of about 1%, although
pseudoelasticity can give shape-memory alloys larger strains closer to
those of the plastics mentioned above; and common ceramics are closer
to 0.1% to 0.01% strain.

Furthermore, biological metamaterials such as wood and sponge can
achieve much greater elastic strains than their component materials
can.  Similar benefits are achieved with crude synthetic metamaterials
such as gels, aerogels, foamed metals, aerated cements, and so on.

This is a potentially serious problem for designing self-reproducing
automata working from exclusively inorganic feedstocks, an objective I
consider important for three different reasons: first, most of the
universe, even most of the earth, does not appear to contain life
forms, and thus mostly lacks complex organic molecules that could be
used to build the automata needed to mine the asteroids; second, it is
desirable that any agent controlling such automata not have an
incentive to, e.g., deforest large areas of land, in order to build
more automata; third, when automata that consume organic matter in
order to operate have appeared in the press, public perception has
been extremely negative.

Such plastics and elastomers fulfill several very important functions
in existing machinery, including vibration isolation (i.e., couplings
with a very low derivative of force with respect to displacement),
relaxing tolerances, elastic energy storage, and protection from
impacts.  Though metals and especially ceramics offer higher ultimate
strengths than plastics and especially elastomers, members made from
metals and (again, especially) ceramics often must be sized orders of
magnitude larger than their static and dynamic loadings to resist
impact loadings.

Vibration isolation
-------------------

Advances in vibration isolation have long been crucial to demanding
apparatus — Michelson and Morley built their interferometer on a slab
of rock floating in mercury, as I understand it, and modern inventions
were the key advances that made LIGO possible.  But many less-exotic
machines need to manage vibration, too.  Everyday modern motor mounts
are commonly made with combinations of elastomeric supports (under
compression) and dashpots.

But there are many other things you can do as well.  Supports in
compression are necessarily sized to have enough rigidity to resist
buckling; this means that even small-displacement vibrations can
transmit a lot of force, and thus energy, through them.  Supports
under flexion, like truck-suspension leaf springs, are not subject to
this limitation, but suffer a compensating lever-arm disadvantage.
Supports in pure tension can supply much more compliance for a given
bearing capacity.  This is why a tensegrity structure provides so much
more compliance, and thus vibration isolation, than a traditional
trusswork.

However, although strings in tension can have a great deal of bearing
capacity for their rigidity, as the frequency increases, the
string’s own density comes into play.  This increases the tension on
the string for a given displacement whenever the wavelength of the
wave (as it would propagate along the string) is comparable to or
shorter than the string’s length, enabling more vibrational energy to
be transmitted through the string.  Moreover, the resonance modes of
the string can smear out a short-lived vibration over a longer period
of time.  LIGO† dealt with this in part by using DSP after the fact to
filter out vibrations at the vibrational frequencies of the
instruments’ tension supports.

A different approach to the problem, also used in LIGO, is to use
giant-compliance mechanisms made by putting a negative-compliance
support (such as an Euler column† near its critical buckling force) in
parallel with a positive-compliance support (such as any everyday
object).  The supports are designed to precisely cancel at the load
they must support, enabling that load to “float” over a relatively
large range of displacements at near-zero net force.

The energy of a vibration is partly reflected from discontinuities in
acoustic impedance; discontinuity-rich environments such as a few
meters of dirt and rocks are quite good at preventing the propagation
of vibrations, to the point that Elon Musk claimed in his TED talk
that neither the US Customs & Border Patrol nor the Israel Defence
Force were capable of detecting tunnels dug more than three tunnel
diameters under, respectively, the Mexican border and the Gaza Strip.
So perhaps a string of beads, each bead connected to the next through
a short length of cord, could work like acoustic multilayer insulation
to exponentially attenuate transmitted vibrations.

Another possible approach — also at play in hiding tunnels from La
Migra — is to use nonlinear interactions to transfer vibrational
energy to progressively higher frequency bands.  Impacts between
relatively rigid particles are one example (say, attaching a box of
dry sand to soak up vibrations — we don’t normally consider quartz
crystals a great damper), but so too are Euler columns crossing their
critical stress (which includes ordinary strings alternating between
tension and slackness), the thin-shell dynamics of cymbal crashes, and
vibrations reaching large stresses in quasielastic substances like
rubber.

Relaxing tolerances
-------------------

Metals and especially ceramics are hard to work with because they
demand very tight tolerances.  Because their limiting strain is so
small, they must be very close to the right shape and position before
being brought into contact; typical tolerances for steel machine parts
are a few microns, and as I understand it, ceramic parts are even more
of a motherfucker.  (This is worsened by the frequent need to do much
shaping of ceramics in a green state before final densification.)

Plastics (and, again, especially rubbers) can simplify this problem
enormously.  If an engine head can seat on a rubber gasket rather than
directly onto the cast-iron cylinder, for example, it need not
withstand the large forces that would be needed to seal it against the
cylinder directly, compensating not only for its manufacturing
imperfections but also its thermal warping.  In high-vacuum systems,
where organic materials generally outgas too much, this role is often
taken up by gaskets made from a malleable metal like indium, thus
avoiding the need to apply large stresses to glass to seal it against
metal.

In another direction, many RepRaps have been built with bits of
plastic hose serving as flexible shaft couplings, to allow for some
misalignment of shafts.  Nowadays, machined springs are more common
for this use, which I think is because they last longer.

As an alternative to using plastic gaskets or flexible shaft couplings
to compensate for inaccurate parts or assembly, possibly
self-reproducing automata can be made from more accurate parts
accurately assembled.  As an alternative to using them to accommodate
for thermal expansion discontinuities, matching thermal coefficients
of expansion is possible (and regularly used to seal metal to glass in
vacuum tubes); graded-TCE materials may help here.

Elastic energy storage
----------------------

For the last few centuries, “clockwork” devices have been driven by
elastic energy storage, typically in brass watch springs rather than
in plastics.  Plastics are actually not very good for elastic energy
storage, despite what would appear to be higher energy densities: they
tend to be viscoelastic rather than purely elastic, losing stored
energy to creep relatively rapidly, and quasielastic elastomers like
polyisoprene actually store the energy as easily-lost heat rather than
strained bond energy as metals do.  (For this same reason, rubber
makes better motor mounts than would a steel spring of nominally the
same stress-strain curve: the rubber dissipates high frequencies.)

Organic materials *are* used for shorter-term elastic energy storage,
such as in bows, which must be unstrung when not in use to prevent
creep.

Impacts
-------

Impact loadings, as I understand it, are characterized by being
limited principally by energy rather than force.  If a perfectly rigid
sphere of 1 kg is traveling at 1 m/s toward your machinery, it can
exert an arbitrarily large pressure or force on the machinery — the
collision of two such idealized horrors would produce infinite force
and pressure for an instant.  But it only has half a joule of energy.
If the material it strikes deforms elastically or plastically, the
forces actually encountered may be quite low; for example, if it
deforms by 1 mm, the sphere stops in about 2 ms, so the force is on
the order of 500 N, the weight of only 50 kg.  If we suppose that the
sphere has a radius of 100 mm, then the pressure is only of the order
30 kPa (5 psi in archaic units).  (The precise numbers depend on
details of the impact such as the distribution of pressure over the
impact area, the stress–strain curve for the impacted material, its
Poisson ratio, its density (!), and so on, so in practice the numbers
might be a few times higher or a few times lower.)  But if the
material only deforms by 100 μm, the impact takes on the order of 200
μs, the force is of the order of 100 kN, and the pressure is of the
order of 3 MPa.  Inversely, if the material deforms by 10 mm, the
impact takes on the order of 20 ms, the force is of the order of 5 N,
and the pressure of the order of 300 Pa.  Thus, by adjusting the
rigidity of the impacted material over two very plausible orders of
magnitude, we can adjust its stress inversely over four orders of
magnitude.

An additional factor is that very rigid impacts will almost certainly
have smaller impact areas than softer impacts, because in a softer
impact, the colliding bodies come into contact over a larger area than
their initial contact.  This factor even comes into play for
non-impact loadings, such as tightening a spark plug on a car engine,
though ductile substances like lead would also help there.

These are the reasons you can lean your full body weight on a car door
window though you can shatter it by flicking a fragment of spark plug
at it.

The impact energy a material can absorb, either elastically or
plastically, is an intrinsic property of the material: it is almost
precisely the integral of its stress over its strain to the limiting
strain in question.  This gives you some number of joules per cubic
meter, or per cubic millimeter.  In the case of elastic deformation,
this is also the energy density of the material when used as a spring.
(Small quibbles may attach from the ability of different structures to
recruit more or less of the material’s energy absorption capacity,
including by way of shear deformations.)

Bending radii and microstructured synthetic metamaterials
---------------------------------------------------------

So we have seen that compliant materials are crucial for a variety of
reasons.  How can we achieve them using inorganic materials?  One
approach is using metamaterials.

If you make a flat plate from a brittle material with 0.02% elongation
at break, such as everyday fired clay, assuming linear elastic
stress-strain behavior, it will break upon bending to a position where
its inner surface is 0.02% shorter than its midline, while its outer
surface is 0.02% longer.  If it’s bent into a circle at this point,
the outer surface is a circle 0.02% larger than the midline circle and
0.04% larger than the inner-surface circle.  So if, for example, it’s
1 mm thick, the radius of the circle is 2.5 m, and its diameter is
5 m.  But if you reduce its thickness, the radius of curvature
diminishes proportionately.

And that’s why aluminum foil and paper can be bent around much tighter
curves before yielding and breaking than aluminum plate and
fiberboard.

As you reduce the thickness of the material, the bulk approximation
does eventually break down, but, interestingly, at micron scales, the
material typically shows greater flexibility than the model would
predict, rather than less — perhaps because of fewer surface defects
and more consistent cooling — until you get to some kind of grain size
of the material, which is on the order of 50 μm for everyday fired
clay, but could be as small as dozens of picometers for some atomic
and molecular materials.

This is the principle behind the everyday coil spring or knit
sock — by structuring ordinary piano wire or cellulose in a particular
way, you can get it to yield like rubber, though a steel spring’s
behavior is closer to ideal elasticity than rubber’s — but I think we
can take it considerably further.  If we make 1-nanometer-thick glass
foil, which should be feasibility, we can roll it up in a double
spiral; if we want the spiral to be able to unroll flat, we can’t
exceed the 2500:1 ratio mentioned earlier, so the center of the spiral
must be a 5000-nm-diameter circle.  If there’s 1 nm of space between
the glass-foil layers, in a 1.005-mm-diameter roll we can have 250’000
layers on each side, 125’000 per direction.  So our 1-mm-diameter roll
can uncoil to hundreds of meters of glass foil!

Because only the glass tangent to the roll is exerting an effective
force, this spring is a very good approximation of a constant-force
spring, like those used instead of counterweights for some sash
windows.

This doesn’t improve the spring energy density of the mass glass
(except by reducing surface defects), but it certainly improves the
elongation at break of the assembly: it has gone from 0.02% to several
hundred million — several tens of billions of percent.

If we continue to use 0.02% as the elastic strain limit, glass foil
thin enough to roll up inside 1 mm must be no more than 200 μm thick.

More complex metamaterials could provide not only tailored
stress-strain curves (within the total elastic energy capacity of the
underlying bulk material) but multidimensional interactions like
auxetic materials.  As Merkle’s buckling-spring logic thought
experiment convincingly demonstrates, the elastic deformation of a
massive body with a complex shape can have arbitrarily complex
behavior, including Turing-completeness (if the material extends far
enough).  Recent experiments in computational origami offer promising
approaches to this problem.

Temperatures
------------

To look at it another way, much of the problem is that most of the
inorganic materials we’re familiar with are brittle at room
temperature, while many plastics aren’t.  But window glass is a
polymer, too; it’s just that its glass transition temperature Tg is
higher than what we're used to.  Soda-lime glass isn’t just compliant
once it's orange-hot — it’s positively *gummy*.  Inversely, we’ve all
seen how rubber behaves when cooled below its Tg with liquid
nitrogen — it shatters like glass.

Basically the problem is that we’re talking about using materials held
together by chemical bonds substantially stronger than many bonds in
organic molecules, though not the C-C bonds that hold together blocks
of graphite or molecules of polyethylene.  So these materials might be
more convenient at a higher temperature, perhaps around 400–900 K
instead of the 300 we’re used to.  (Carborundum and diamond may be
more viable semiconductors at these temperatures than silicon or
germanium.)  From an extraterrestrial perspective, Venus is no weirder
than Terra, though a bit more expensive to emulate with MLI.

Going the other direction, at 100 or 200 K, perhaps we could use other
unfamiliar materials.  Water, of course, forms a crystalline solid at
273 K.  I don’t know what materials might form glasses at such
temperatures; maybe mixtures of common materials (mixtures generally
have less tendency to crystallize), or polymers that I'm not familiar
with because they’re too weakly bound to be stable at 300 K.
