Suppose you have a matrix of 2×2 copper electrodes per millimeter.  So
if you have a 100×100 millimeter area, you might have 200×200
electrodes, a total of 40,000.  To each you have attached a
transistor.  On top of this matrix, you have a bath of electrolyte
containing, for example, copper salts.  If you lay a sheet of metal
atop this bath of electrolyte at a depth of less than half a
millimeter or so, you can selectively copper-plate certain parts of
the sheet, printing a copper pattern on the sheet, by passing current
through some of the electrodes and not others.

You can renew the electrodes to some extent by taking the workpiece
out, replacing it with a sacrificial copper sheet, and reversing the
current.

With this approach, you could conceivably electrodeposit one layer
after another of copper until you have generated whatever shape you
desire, gradually lifting the workpiece out of the bath.  However,
copper plating is a slow process, with deposition speeds of tens of
microns per hour.  The very short distance traveled by the current in
this approach might allow the process to run a little faster.

This suggests that this approach might be more practical at a smaller
scale: if your deposition rate is 10 microns per hour, that’s about
2.8 nm per second.  So you could reasonably space your electrodes 500
microns apart and electrodeposit your copper in 500-nm layers, one
every three minutes.  If you are doing this over a 10mm×10mm square
chip, each layer contains 400 million voxels, or about 2 million per
second, which is an eminently feasible data rate.  Filling a cube in
this way would require 1000 hours (plus the time to refresh the
electrodes), so you probably want to make thin things instead.

The ability to deposit multiple different materials, such as copper
and zinc, or copper and nickel, or gold and nickel, or nickel and tin,
or copper and chromium, or lead and chromium, seems like it would
dramatically extend the reach of this technique, allowing the
construction of metamaterials with vanishing thermal coefficients of
expansion, high-current-density batteries, or bimetallic structures
that deform in predetermined ways according to temperature, for
example.

Material cost is likely to not be an issue, except for extremely
exotic materials and maybe gold.  A milliliter of gold weighs about
0.6 troy ounces, or about US$1000; above I estimated that the device
would need 1000 hours to deposit it, using about US$1 of gold per
hour, but probably costing significantly more than US$1 per hour in
labor to operate.  Other normal metals cost orders of magnitudes less.
Extremely exotic materials might include things like pure lanthanides
(as opposed to Mischmetall) and isotopically pure metals.

Using a molten-salt electrolyte like the Hall-Héroult cell, rather
than an ionic-solution electrolyte, might allow electrodeposition that
is more favorable in one or another way: for example, you could
electrodeposit aluminum and other metals that react too easily with
water.

Of course, the ability to selectively electrodeposit controllably
doped semiconductors in this way would be immensely valuable, but I
don’t know of any semiconductors that would be viable candidates by
themselves.  It might be possible, though, to selectively
electrodeposit a doped metal, then oxidize the metal into a
semiconductor by exposing it to an oxidizer, maybe at high
temperature.  For example, you could oxidize zinc to zinc oxide or
zinc sulfide, lead to lead sulfide (galena), copper to copper oxide,
or titanium to titanium dioxide.

