Everything is money?
====================

A remark overheard at the end of a math lecture, when the students
were complaining about having to use different programming languages
in different math classes (R, Octave, Python): "Everything is money."
This was intended as an explanation for why essential free-software
libraries for certain algorithms were not available in some of these
programming languages, ruling those languages out for classes that
needed to use those algorithms.

This struck me as profoundly short-sighted and unaware of the history
of free-software development, particularly coming from a professor who
shall not be named but who can trace their academic lineage back to
Lagrange.  When Euler and Lagrange were inventing the variational
calculus in 1754 to 1756, Euler was indeed being paid --- he was the
director of mathematics at the Prussian Academy of Sciences.  But
spending some of his professor time on reading letters from Lagrange
was entirely his own decision --- not only did the providers of
funding not know that Euler was doing this, but under the basic norms
of Prussian academic freedom later codified by Humboldt, they did not
have the right to know or to veto it.  Moreover, Lagrange was not
being paid for this; he did get a position as Sostituto del Maestro di
Matematica for the Piedmontese army in 1755, but there he was being
paid to teach calculus and ballistics to military artillery engineers.

The variational calculus wasn't published until 1762, at which point
it was published by the Turin Society (*Societas Privata
Taurinensis*), which Lagrange established with his students in 1757,
and which today is the *Accademia delle Scienze di Torino*.  It was
initially established as a private club, but before the publication of
the variational calculus, it had gained royal patronage from
Victor-Amadeus in 1759, making it the Royal Turin Academy of Sciences
(*Société Royale des Sciences de Turin*).

Much of the history of mathematics, academia in general, and free
software is like this.  If you want to know why a theory was developed
or why a book or free-software library was written, it is only
minimally informative to investigate who was paying for it and what
they wanted to fund.  Instead you should look for what interested the
individual people who developed or wrote it, what other scholars they
were in touch with, and what ideas they were influenced by.

Sometimes the *absence* of free software or research can be explained
by funding.  Snapshots in free-software filesystems don't exist
because NetApp funded patents to stop them during many years.
High-quality free-software mixed-integer linear programming solvers
don't exist because researchers use CPLEX, Gurobi, Xpress, or SCIP ---
see file `linear-optimization-landscape` for the whole sad story.
There's no decent free-software spreadsheet for Android because people
just use Google Sheets.  Little public-domain research exists on
isotopic enrichment because the US and Israel have funded wide-ranging
efforts to prevent it, to the point of releasing industrial-sabotage
viruses into the wild and assassinating researchers.

Wikipedia, of course, is the first place any student of mathematics
goes to learn about any mathematical concept.  Wikipedia is written
and edited by people who do not get paid, except in a minority of
cases usually considered vandalism.

So, not everything is money, I think.
