Capital goods are a feature of human life that goes back millions of
years; their existence doesn’t require exchange between people, or
even multiple people.  Capital accumulation is the fundamental
mechanism that drove the Industrial Revolutions, which dramatically
improved material abundance, quality of life, and life expectancy over
the last several centuries.  However, in the next decades, capital
will be eclipsed by another factor of production, one which is often
misclassified as merely another form of capital: knowledge, which
behaves more like plant cultivars than like capital.  This is the most
significant change in the material conditions of human existence since
the beginning of the Stone Age, a hundred and fifty thousand
generations ago, and it is likely that people after this eclipse will
not be what we recognize as “human” today, differing from us as much
as chimpanzees do.

Capital goods are a feature of human life that goes back millions of years
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

“Capital goods” are durable goods that are only used as a factor of
production, rather than being consumed and thus having a use value in
themselves.  At least 2.6 million years ago — a hundred and thirty
thousand generations — we began splitting river-smoothed cobbles in
half to get sharp-edged stones to butcher animals with, among other
things.  Those tools were capital goods: what we consumed was the meat
from the animals, which required labor to produce, but less labor with
the tools, which also required labor to produce.  By taking some time
off from butchering animals to make tools, paradoxically, we could
butcher more animals.

This is a recursive process.  You can cut green wood with a hand axe
held in your hand, but if you make an adze blade and mount it on a
wooden haft, you can cut green wood much more easily — including
making more hafts for more adzes.  So accumulating some capital
increases the productivity with which you can accumulate more capital.
The “Primitive Technology” video blog demonstrates this process.

Knowledge is central to this process, as indeed it is central to
hunting or gardening even without any capital goods.

During the Stone Age, it seems that capital accumulation was largely
limited by available knowledge.  One stone adze can make you much more
productive at cutting wood; two adzes can perhaps make you a bit more
productive still if they are suited for different purposes; but you
run into diminishing returns fairly quickly.  Adzes don’t appear in
the fossil record until the Mesolithic.  So from 2.6 million years ago
until only 20 000 years ago — over 99% of the history of
capital — people were apparently using choppers and hand axes without
hafts, so accumulated capital perhaps did not yet recursively
facilitate the accumulation of further capital; our productivity was
determined more by our knowledge than by how much capital we had
accumulated.

Capital goods don’t require exchange between people, or even multiple people
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be apparent from the above that even if you are Robinson
Crusoe alone on a desert island, accumulating some capital is likely
to be useful.  Indeed, the “Primitive Technology” video series shows a
guy doing more or less just that, albeit with survival support from
modern society.  Beginning with only land, its anonymous author
successively constructs hand axes, a rainproof shelter, a hafted stone
adze and a hafted celt axe, a pottery kiln, and a cob house with
underfloor fire heating and a ceramic-tile roof.  He singlehandedly
recapitulated the entire technological development of the Stone Age,
reaching the level of our ancestors about 12000 years ago — six
hundred generations — in a bit over a year.  This shows convincingly
that the primary limiting factor of production throughout the Stone
Age was knowledge rather than capital or materials.

The principle of investing some percentage of your production in
capital goods rather than consumption goods in order to achieve an
exponential improvement in your material standard of living is thus
not limited to scenarios where you can trade with other people; it is
a principle that has worked to some extent for millions of years,
recursively since the Neolithic, and spectacularly since the 18th
Century.

And the reign of this principle, this fundamental aspect of our human
nature, is coming to an end — not in millennia or centuries but in
decades.

Capital accumulation drove the Industrial Revolutions
-----------------------------------------------------

From the time agriculture triumphed in the Neolithic until the
Industrial Revolutions began in the 1700s, the primary constraint on
economic productivity was land.  Land was wealth; landowners called
themselves the “nobility”.  The agricultural productivity of the land,
which changed only slowly, determined its population, which would
shrink when it periodically descended into wars of Malthusian
desperation when food was scarce.

[XXX: okay, if that’s so, then why did the First Industrial Revolution
even matter at all?  Did people start living longer?  They weren’t
fertilizing their fields with industrial products, were they?]

In the 1700s, steam engines became capable of doing useful work, first
sucking water out of coal mines and then driving boats and wagons
around.  This distinguished a new factor of economic production, one
which had previously been confused with labor — what we now call
“energy”.  Although we had used draft animals, water wheels, and
windmills to do heavy work before, steam engines immensely increased
both the total wattage available and the total wattage manageable per
worker.  The marketing of motive energy as a commodity in the form of
coal enabled economic production to be limited only by the necessary
human labor to operate the machinery — and so machinery became
immensely more complex and expensive in order to be able to turn
energy into consumable goods with use value.

From the 1770s until, let’s say, the 1970s, the primary constraint on
economic productivity was no longer land, labor, energy, or knowledge,
but rather capital goods.  The First Industrial Revolution pioneered
mass production, as in Adam Smith’s pin factory, and mechanized the
production of many goods; and the recursivity of capital goods
increased dramatically, as the tools, materials, and processes used by
machinists to make machines advanced in leaps and bounds; but the
actual machines in question were relatively specialized, and the stock
of them grew only slowly.  The Second Industrial Revolution reduced
the need for both labor and capital to reach a given level of
productivity by way of “mass production”, which to a large extent was
a matter of things like digging with a bigger shovel and never leaving
it idle.  This was the age when it was reasonable to value a publicly
traded industrial or transportation company in large part by its book
value, the accounting value of its assets, largely capital goods.

The Industrial Revolutions dramatically increased material abundance
--------------------------------------------------------------------

The Industrial Revolutions improved material quality of life and life expectancy
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Capital will be eclipsed by knowledge in the next decades
---------------------------------------------------------

Knowledge behaves more like plant cultivars than like capital
-------------------------------------------------------------

The eclipse of capital by knowledge is as big as the Stone Age shift to capital
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The end of the human race as we know it
---------------------------------------
