Tile graphics hardware with sprites, like that on the NES, was
designed to make scrolling color video-game graphics achievable in
1983 at a reasonable cost.  But it also makes certain kinds of visual
effects fairly easy to achieve, like wallpapering an area with a
repeating pattern or scrolling or globally changing the appearance of
a certain kind of tile.  Other effects, like changing the on-screen
size of anything, are harder.

Sprites themselves are an affordance for making moving objects on a
static background; without hardware sprites, given mutable tiles, you
could always just use four tile types per sprite, compositing the
sprite in the appropriate place in each tile type each frame.  I saw
MS-DOS text-mode programs that did this for the mouse pointer.

Given enough tile definitions to have a separate definition for each
tile on the screen, and enough colors that you can 

Nowadays our affordances run more to gradients and alpha-blending,
although to some extent that’s only because our program output doesn’t
go through a video codec, which has different affordances.

Polynomials
-----------

There’s a variety of ways you can express the space of polynomial
functions.

You can express a degree-N polynomial as N+1 coefficients, which is
convenient for many calculations but doesn’t make it particularly easy
to achieve any given effect.

Given some k, you can express it as N+1 coefficients of a polynomial
in (x-k).  If k happens to be one of the zeroes of the polynomial, you
only need N coefficients, since the constant term is zero.

Extending this idea to its limit, you can express it as a scale factor
and a set of zeroes: 3(x-1)(x+2)(x+5) has a scale factor of 3 and
zeroes at 1, -2, and -5; its representation as zeroes is thus [3, 1,
-2, -5].  It works out to 3x³ + 18x² + 9x - 30, so its representation
as coefficients is [3, 18, 9, -30], although sometimes people prefer
to write that in the other order.  (Transforming from zeroes to
coefficients is easy; going the other way can be hairy.)

You can express it with its values at some given abscissas and then
use Lagrange interpolation.  For a given set of abscissas, such as the
nonnegative integers, you have a constant set of Lagrange basis
polynomials; the polynomial is a weighted sum of its values at these
points, which is to say that the transformations between this Lagrange
form and the form as coefficients are linear.  But the Lagrange form
allows you to express the polynomial function in terms of its value at
some given points, which is often more convenient.

That of course leaves open the question of the set of abscissas to
choose.  Sometimes it’s more expressive to be able to choose which
abscissas to use, but this is somewhat dangerous with Lagrange
interpolation, just as with splines of orders greater than 3; a bad
choice of nodes can easily lead to unwanted oscillations (the Runge
phenomenon).  If you’re approximating some existing smooth curve,
using the Chebyshev nodes minimizes this.

The Chebyshev polynomials form another orthogonal basis into which you
can linearly transform a polynomial.

For a given step size and starting point, you can express the
polynomial in terms of the initial state of the method of divided
differences for tabulating values of the polynomial.  These values are
a linear transform of the coefficients and thus also of the Lagrange
form; you can easily derive them by calculating some values of the
polynomial and writing a difference table.  They are called the
“Newton form” of the polynomial.  The Newton form is in some sense not
very expressive, in that the numbers in it don’t correspond very
directly to any interesting feature of the polynomial itself.
However, it’s very convenient for calculation.

Order-n polynomials on the real numbers (or even the rationals, or any
dense set) are entirely determined by their value and first n
derivatives at any arbitrary point; this is the basis of the
Taylor-series approximation of a function, which is the analytic
equivalent of the Newton form.  A polynomial function is equal to its
Taylor series as soon as the Taylor series’ order equals or exceeds
that of the original polynomial.  So the derivatives at some given
point are yet another representation of the polynomial, another one
which is linearly related to the coefficients.

It isn’t necessary for all the derivatives to be at the same point;
it’s adequate to specify N+1 values or derivatives as long as no two
of them are the same.

State machines
--------------

You can specify state machines as regular expressions...