In file `heck-balls` I wrote a bit about Heckballs (Jecvals), although
that dates to before I had done a bunch of the work I actually did on
them.

Since then I've messed around quite a bit more with sheet cutting
design (see for example file `cardboard-furniture`) and come up with
some other ideas.

Locking tabs in slits for sprung snap joints
--------------------------------------------

One of the biggest improvements I haven't yet tested solves the
problem of Heckballs falling apart once assembled due to the
imprecision of the press fit.  I saw this solution in a discarded
liquor-box partition cardboard on the sidewalk one day.  By extending
the insertion bevel or chamfer or divot on one side of the mouth of a
slit further down the slit, between one third and halfway down, it
becomes possible to flex the inserted sheet significantly to one side
after it's already inserted in the slit; the non-mouth end of the
bevel becomes a fulcrum for this bending.  Then, we add a roughly
triangular projection to the opposite side of the slit, at the mouth;
one side of it forms an insertion bevel at around 45°, while the other
side is at right angles to the slit, forming a retaining clip.  A
corresponding hole is added to the sheet for it to insert into.

I've done this with cardboard and a scalpel, and in that medium it
works beautifully, but MDF is quite a bit more rigid; will it work in
Jecvals?

To be concrete about the dimensions, the octagon width in Heckballs is
100 mm, so the shallow slits are 25 mm.  (There are also deep slits
for joining two octagons into a ball.)  I was cutting in 3 mm MDF with
2-mm chamfers (i.e., the chamfer forms a 2mm, 2mm, 2<sup>1½</sup>mm
right triangle) and 3.03 mm slit width.  Extending the chamfer to 12.5
mm down the slit and 3 mm of extra slit width gives 12.5 mm of
bendable span.  We'd like to use a tab that presses on the full
thickness of the inside surface of the hole, which would make it 3 mm
tall, 3 mm deep, and a 3√2 diagonal if it uses 45°.

But how much can we bend without stress-relief cuts?  We only have
12.5 mm - 3 mm = 9.5 mm of bend length to work with!  According to
file `heck-balls`, MDF has elongation at break of 0.45%; if we use
0.3% to be safe, the inner part of a circular bend can be 0.3% shorter
and the outer part 0.3% longer, so the bend radius must be 150 times
the material thickness or more: 450 mm.  450 mm - √((450 mm)² - (9.5
mm)²) is, unfortunately, only 0.1 mm, which is so small that it might
just slip out.  If we extend the chamfer depth to 20 mm, leaving only
5 mm at the bottom of the slit to hold things in place, we might have
19 mm of bend; 450 mm - √((450 mm)² - (19 mm)²) = 0.4 mm, and an 0.4
mm tab is enough for some energy barrier to retention, but at a heavy
cost to rigidity, and only about 10% of the crush strength of the
material.

Also you'd probably want to chamfer the end of the retention tab
triangle to keep it from breaking off, fillet the base one way or
another to prevent a stress riser, and angle the retention tab contact
surface so that it always makes contact over at least some of its
surface despite manufacturing variations.

Three perhaps more viable approaches:

- Have a full 3-mm-thickness tab that engages and disengages the hole
  without any elastic deformation directly, using a rigid-body
  relative motion, and some other much smaller normally-zero-load
  latching tab using elastic deformation to prevent that rigid motion.
  I'm not sure exactly how this would work yet.

- Instead of relying on sheet flexion to provide the elastic
  engagement motion, cut an in-plane flexure to allow the *latching
  tab* to move, perhaps like an injection-molded plastic clip.  This
  can easily achieve much thinner bending sections (200 microns is
  feasible) and thus much smaller bending radii, and tabs can grab
  from both sides of the hole, cutting the distance of flexion in
  half, and avoiding accidental disengagement from structure loading.
  This might require more complex cuts.

- Use acrylic or cardboard or something instead of inflexible MDF.

Such clipping approaches would provide Jecvals structures with
much-needed tensile strength and dimensional precision.

Panels and beam holes
---------------------

The Jecvals beams form a lattice of the balls 400 mm center to center;
this lattice can contain 400-mm squares and 400-mm equilateral
triangles.  If we add some holes along the centerlines of the beams,
we can make panels with tabs that slot into these holes, thus enabling
the construction of things like shelves, screens (*biombos*), and
tables.  To keep adjacent panels from trying to fill up the same hole
from opposite sides, there should be at least four different hole
positions, none of which are at the center point of the beam, so that
flipping a panel over will move it into a different hole in the beams.

In the case of the triangles, there will definitely be non-right
angles between the panels and the beams, which means that the holes
need to be wider than the panel material thicknes.

In some cases the panels can be made of other materials, such as
1.5-mm MDF, acrylic, or colored paper.

It would be desirable for the holes for the panels to permit the
engagement of other parts as well, such as beam ends, but I'm not sure
how to make that possible.
