I was thinking about generating shapes via laser-cut geometry, and it
occurred to me that laser-cut fabric can inexpensively form netting
with quite flexible 3-D geometry, which can be applied to a variety of
important applications.

Background: auxetic materials and conformal surface mapping
-----------------------------------------------------------

I just watched the presentations of “Beyond Developable” from SIGGRAPH
2016 and “Rapid Deployment of Curved Surfaces via Programmable
Auxetics” from SIGGRAPH 2018, collectively by Mina Konaković-Luković,
Julian Panetta, Keenan Crane, Mark Pauly, Sofien Bouaziz, Bailin Deng,
and Daniel Piker.  (I think this is mostly Mark Pauly’s group at EPFL
LGG.)

In the 2016 paper, they cut relatively rigid sheets of material into
an auxetic triangular metamaterial pattern which can linearly stretch
by up to a factor of 2, but more or less uniformly — that is, if a
region of it is stretched by a factor of 1.3 along the *x*-axis, it's
also stretched by about 1.3 along the *y*-axis, along the *x* = *y*
line, along the *x* = -*y* line, and so on.  The stretch can vary from
one region of the material to another, but only gradually.  These work
out to mean that it expands *conformally*, which turns out to mean
that it can be relatively easily hand-bent into computer-designed
shapes or adapt to the form of the wearer’s body.

In the 2018 paper, they extend this work in a couple of ways: cutting
some of the material “pre-expanded”, distorting the triangular mesh to
vary the properties of the metamaterial, and sometimes replacing the
cut sheet of material with a bunch of solid triangles linked together,
with the sizes varied to limit the expansion.  Then they force it to
expand in different ways: by inflating it with a polyethylene bag or a
balloon or by allowing it to hang freely from a frame.

Laser-cut netting from fabric
-----------------------------

Although I haven’t tried, converting fabric to netting by laser
cutting should be straightforward: you just cut some holes in it.
This is probably better to do with acrylic†, cotton, or silk fabric
than nylon or polyester, although [Engadget says] it is also used with
nylon and polyester.  Cotton cut this way without further treatment
will probably fray, but the other materials might form melted edges
that impede fraying.

[Engadget says]: https://www.engadget.com/2014/06/17/laser-cut-clothing-explainer/

If you draw a Voronoi diagram of the hole centers, each vertex of the
Voronoi diagram is in the middle of a piece of cloth which is
connected along lines to adjacent vertices; these adjacent vertices
are connected by cloth “bridges” under the Voronoi lines.  If we
expand the holes without allowing them to cross these lines, the
bridges become thinner, but the overall surface retains the same
Gaussian curvature as the original cloth, which had better be zero if
we are going to be doing this on a garden-variety laser cutter.

If we want to allow a region of the netting to develop positive
Gaussian curvature, the simplest thing we can do is to make the
Voronoi lines of that region follow the bias rather than the threads
of the fabric, assuming it’s a woven or nonwoven fabric.  (Actually,
even simpler is to use a knit fabric, which is stretchy enough to
curve any which way, but that gives up precisely the control I’m
exploring here.)

However, we can do better than that.  By making the fabric bridges
squiggle, we can make them longer — potentially by orders of
magnitude, serpentining almost arbitrarily far across the space from
one node to another, filling in most the neighboring holes with their
squiggling.  The inside radii of these squiggles need to be large
enough to prevent stress risers, also known as “rips”, from starting;
in some cases this will require discarding a teardrop shape from the
inside of the curve, but in other cases the outside radius of a
neighboring squiggle can fill the space, thus maximizing the use of
cloth.

In this way, it should be possible to expand a 100-mm square of fabric
(or even less) into a 1-m square (or more) of netting which assumes
some complicated three-dimensional shape when fully inflated — either
a fully determined form, if the graph of net nodes consists entirely
of triangles (Bucky Fuller’s “omnitriangulated”), or a more flexible
form if some or all of the holes in the net have other shapes.  By
applying the process to heavy, strong fabrics such as twill, denim,
seatbelt webbing, canvas, or burlap, it should be possible to quickly
manufacture fairly complex, strong three-dimensional forms.

In some cases, particularly without omnitriangulation, squiggling is
not necessary, because the nodes can be mapped into the plane of the
original fabric in such a way as to put network-nearby nodes far
apart.  Consider, for example, a series of concentric rings of cloth
linked together by quarter-turn spirals: if hung from the center of
the cloth, the spirals untwist and become lines along a cone from its
vertex, while the rings run around the cone.  Some teardrops will
still be needed at junctions to prevent stress risers.

Uniform amounts of squiggling over an area will not produce positive
curvature when fully extended, but zero Gaussian curvature; in that
case, a local reduction in squiggling will produce a region of
*negative* Gaussian curvature, as demonstrated in the 2018 paper
mentioned above.

† “Acrylic” fiber is polyacrylonitrile, which is not the same chemical
as the poly(methyl methacrylate) “acrylic glass” (Lucite, Plexiglas,
or Perspex) which is so popular as a laser-cutting medium.  So it
might not be as safe or convenient.

Geometry limitations
--------------------

The shapes you can make from the fully extended omnitriangulated nets
will necessarily be pretty convex; they can’t have “pockets” in them,
in the machining sense of a cavity eaten out of a surface, rather than
the sartorial sense.  Moreover, the net geometry, even if
omnitriangulated, only controls the local curvature of the surface,
not its global curvature.  Once an omnitriangulated surface curves
around to form a closed surface, the global curvature becomes fully
determined, but until then it is potentially kind of floppy.  For
clothing this is usually considered advantageous, but not for some
other possible applications.

Long protrusions are possible, but limited — they necessarily imply
cloth density limited to their circumference-to-length ratio.  That
is, if they are twenty times longer than their circumference, they
cannot have more than 5% cloth coverage.

Further alternative materials
-----------------------------

Although ordinary textiles are probably the best material to use for
this for many purposes, other possibilities exist.  Nonwoven polyester
(polar-fleece and *friselina*) can be dramatically cheaper and may be
more computationally predictable, though not as strong or as stiff.
Paper or Tyvek are cheaper still, and probably faster to cut.  EVA
foam (“foam rubber”) is laser-cuttable and is widely used for shoes.

I haven’t personally seen gel-spun UHMWPE fabric yet, whether woven or
knit, but if you can get it woven, it might offer better strength and
enormously better dimensional control than the other fabrics mentioned
above.  I’ve seen advertisements for pantyhose and backpacks made from
gel-spun UHMWPE fabric, knit in both cases.

Other sheet-cutting processes, such as high-powered laser cutting,
waterjet cutting, and CNC torch cutting, could be used to cut sheet
metal into similar netting-like structures, though its behavior under
strain would be different; if you do manage to stretch it into shape,
it will probably work-harden in the process, especially if you’re
using annealed copper or aluminum.  Your dimensional precision is
going to be shit.

Cloth made from carbon fiber, glass fiber, or basalt fiber would also
provide higher strength and better dimensional control than more
common fibers, but they might not be cuttable with a low-power laser.

Woven aluminum or steel window-screen material is another candidate
for a higher-strength, higher-dimensional-precision material (though
perhaps inferior to UHMWPE), and it could be cut very rapidly,
possibly in several layers at a time, with plasma torches or
high-powered lasers.

Coloring the net
----------------

The amount of fabric in an area has an upper bound determined by the
degree of expansion that area experiences when going from the original
flat fabric to the fully extended net, and a lower bound determined by
the required strength of the netting.  However, these will commonly be
quite wide limits.  This means that you can vary the net coverage in
an area to moderate its color.  In particular, white netting over a
black background should be able to produce significant changes in
luminance, though the maximum contrast will be limited as described.

Moreover, by using three or four layers of netting nested inside one
another — red, green, blue, and possibly white — full-color images
should be feasible, as long as moiré patterns and coregistration can
be kept under adequate control.

Uses of shaped netting
----------------------

Clothing and hammocks are the most immediately obvious uses.  A
laser-cut woven or nonwoven netting layer can provide shape, while a
fine knit layer underneath can prevent the netting from being
uncomfortable or transparent when those are not desired.  Netting
shirts are already popular for hot days and for dance clubs.

Aeron-style chairs typically use knit netting for the seats and backs,
providing much better ventilation than more traditional styles of
chairs; laser-cut netting should be a reasonable alternative.
Director’s chairs and foldable camping chairs traditionally have
canvas seats, but breathable fine netting would be an improvement.

Some other household items can be feasibly made in this way.  My shoes
hang in the closet in a cloth organizer that I think could be made
from netting.  A collapsible bucket for carrying water can consist of
a hoop, some a plastic-bag liner, and netting to support the bag.
Stuffed animals can be made of netting to give shape to fine knit
cloth containing the stuffing.  Houseplants can be potted in netting
pockets suspended from railings.  Backpacks, curtains, and clothes
hampers can be made from netting.

Breathable shoe uppers can be made from EVA-foam “netting”, and other
uses might include objects like toolboxes that would benefit from
being flexible and lightweight but cannot afford cloth netting's
tendency to snag on anything sharp.

Inflatable sculptures, like those made by Ophélie Dorgans, can be
easily inflated to multi-meter size, but historically it has been
somewhat difficult to control their shape; most bouncy castles and
advertising balloon critters are, geometrically speaking, kind of
shitty.  This approach offers an alternative: inflate a big shapeless
plastic bag inside a shaping net.  (This is demonstrated in the 2018
paper mentioned above.)  As explained above, the shaping net can also
provide color.

Such an inflatable sculpture could be inflated with methane, hydrogen,
or helium and unleashed over a city, as with the 1970s UFO art prank
Theo Jansen participated in and the earlier Los Angeles Meteor prank.
(I can’t remember if that last one is still anonymous or not.)

Blow molding of plastic bottles and vacuum molding of sheets of PET
and other thermoplastics should be feasible using netting forms made
in these ways, particularly if the fabric is cotton or nylon.  As with
clothing, a layer of fine knit fabric between the net and the hot
plastic may be a useful mechanism for reducing netting marks on the
surface.

With a reasonably flexible and gritproof liner — again, perhaps fine
knit cotton — these netting forms could be suspended from frames and
used as molds for poured-in plaster, concrete (which additionally
demands alkali resistance, which cellulose and polyester have), lime
cement, fluidized greensand, waterglass-bonded sand, or perhaps even
slip (*barbotina*) for slipcasting.

Many of the above-mentioned castable materials are most interesting as
refractory mold materials for metal casting, but of course in metal
casting usually you want pocketing, which is, as I said above,
impossible — assuming that the molding materials are on the convex
side of the netting.  An alternative might be to inflate the netting
with a plastic bag, then pour plaster (or cement or whatever) around
it to make the mold.

By painting, epoxy-impregnating, airplane-doping, sizing, stuccoing,
spraycreting, or applying *barbotina* to an inflated net, perhaps with
knit-fabric layers on one side or the other, you should be able to
make a thin composite material, reinforced by the fabric layer or
layers to reduce its brittleness.  Depending on the composition, this
composite may be adequately sturdy even for some metal-casting
processes.

In some cases, just filling the netting with sand may be sufficient; I
suspect this may be one of the lowest-cost ways to get acoustic
panels.

Cutting starched cloth board
----------------------------

The only laser-cutting machine I’ve used can cut 6-mm MDF at about
24 mm/s, but can cut thinner materials faster.  Many interesting
laser-cuttable fabrics are in the neighborhood of 200 μm thick,
suggesting that the laser could cut them at a speed on the order of
1 m/s.  However, particularly cutting complex shapes, the machine is
mechanically capable only of a dramatically lower speed than that.

As I understand it, typical mass textile fabrication is done by
cutting a thick stack of fabric to the pieces of the pattern with a
bandsaw knife before sending the pieces out to be pieced together.
Hundreds or thousands of layers of cloth are cut at once.  (Mistakes
here are ruinously expensive, ruining thousands of meters of cloth
with a single bad cut.)

Typically the laser-cutting shop is not willing to cut multiple sheets
of material at once, perhaps because they blow apart under the air
blast, ruining the laser focus.  But perhaps we could laminate several
layers of cloth together with an adhesive to form a board similar to
MDF, cut them, and later remove the adhesive.

One promising adhesive for this purpose is food starch: it is a
polysaccharide like cellulose, so it doesn’t stink when it burns, and
it is commonly used for stiffening common fabrics, even polyester,
which is a material notoriously resistant to being stuck to.  As
“wheat paste”, it is also commonly used as an adhesive in bookbinding
and papier-mâché.  In fabrics that can withstand boiling — basically
anything *but* polyester — removing it is also easy.

Papier-mâché practice demonstrates a risk of the cloth-board approach:
drying time is necessary between layers in order to avoid trapping
excessive moisture within the material.  A warm air blast should be
able to speed up this process.

This approach should make it possible to cut dozens of layers of cloth
at once at MDF-like speeds, thus greatly reducing the cost of complex
shapes, if you wanted more than one of them, anyway.

### Alternative chemistries ###

Other candidate dissolvable adhesives for this purpose include sugar,
PMMA, polystyrene, carrageenan, gelatin (or hide glue), calcium
stearate, albumin, urea, and pectin.  All of these could also be used
as sizing to paint inflated netting to solidify it, as described
earlier.

Salt is probably bad because it would produce HCl, chlorine, and
sodium gases; waterglass is probably bad because it wouldn’t cut with
a low-power laser, and might swell up and block the cut instead;
baking soda might work but might produce NaOH when cutting; nitrates
are probably bad because they might offgas nitric acid and nitrate the
cellulose when fiercely heated; sulfates probably wouldn’t cut (and
might offgas acid sulfur oxides and produce toxic sodium sulfide); and
soluble phosphates might have similar problems.  (Ammonium phosphates
in particular decompose to ammonia and molten anhydrous phosphoric
acid upon fierce heating.)  Some of these, especially waterglass and
in-situ-formed phosphates of calcium or copper, might be suitable for
painting onto an already-cut inflated netting form.

In other contexts, the possibility of selectively and precisely
forming such gases on a surface or within a material with a
laser-cutting machine might be very useful.  Ben Krasnow on his
Applied Science YouTube channel has reviewed a tactile-printing paper
whose surface swells up when locally heated, for example.
