Designing a drawing editor for well-factored drawings
=====================================================

As described in file `dercuano-drawings`, I want to add illustrations
to Dercuano.  These include things like sketches of screen layouts,
box-and-arrow diagrams for things like data flows, cutaways of
mechanical devices, pictures of three-dimensional solids to refer to
in the text, plots of physical properties, decorative orders,
timelines, diagrams of records in memory, and so on.  But I want the
illustrations not to be extremely large files, so as to keep Dercuano
easily downloadable.

In file `fitts-law-musings`, I’ve talked a bit (perhaps to the point
of beating a dead horse) about achieving this kind of efficiency at
the primitive level: freehand drawings are going to involve a lot of
coordinates of points, lines, and curves, placed individually with a
stylus, mouse, or finger, and continuously displaced until they look
right.  And it’s probably beneficial both to the quality of the
drawing and to the download size to include intentional, considered
placements and exclude random measurement noise.

But the primitive level is just one aspect of a visual language,
albeit the only one that is accessible to purely freehand drawings,
which have much to recommend them.  And on top of this, we can layer
things like blur and sharpen filters, or cutting and bending existing
primitives, or using them as reference points for more primitives.
However, it’s also often useful to make drawings by combining existing
drawings, rather than starting entirely from scratch.  The simplest
way of doing this is just putting one drawing next to another in a
larger drawing, and a better way of doing merely this was sufficient
for Gutenberg to revolutionize the world.  But several other means of
combination are possible!

In particular, let’s talk about curves (“polylines”) and how they can
be combined.

Curves have many attributes
---------------------------

A curve on the page has a shape, by which we mean that each point
along the curve has a position, an orientation, and a curvature.  If
we remember which direction the curve was drawn, it has a direction,
which is the orientation plus one more bit of data.  If we remember
the speed with which the curve was drawn, each point also has a time
and a speed.  These are the intrinsic data of the curve; it also has a
variety of presentation attributes or aesthetics, typically including
fill color, stroke color, z-order, and stroke thickness, which we can
change without changing (in the view we adopt here) the curve itself.

Most of these aesthetics can also vary continuously along the length
of the curve, just like its curvature and position.  Letterform curve
thicknesses typically vary according to the local orientation of the
stroke, and we could imagine applying such a relationship to a curve
or many curves, perhaps interactively adjusting anchors on an
auxiliary X–Y function curve like the luminance curves in the GIMP.
Or we could adjust the curve thickness as a function of time, or of
the distance from the start of the curve, or, if we make it a function
of speed, orientation, and direction, we can perhaps achieve a
quill-pen calligraphic effect.

A curve can be approximated by a series of directed line segments,
each of which is associated with a local frame of reference, one which
distorts (perhaps via perspective) to follow the curve.  These
distorted frames of reference, if used to transform the unit square,
will produce a sequence of trapezoids that approximate the curve with
unit thickness.  But the frames of reference can be orthogonalized,
normalized, and even derotated, so that they become nothing more than
a sequence of translations to the midpoints of line segments along the
curve; or only some subset of these neutering operations can be
applied.  The line segments themselves can be placed according to
fixed length, fixed time, fixed maximum angle, fixed approximation
error, or some other criterion.  By using fixed-length segments and
using them to transform a tileable graphic segment, we can transform
the curve into a rope, a braid, a dotted line, a (rather poor) dashed
line, or a curly border.

Given two curves, we can produce a variable number of additional
curves interpolating between them (both in intrinsics and in
aesthetics), or extrapolating beyond them.  Moreover, we can adjust
the interpolation; the interpolated curves can be anchored along some
other curve, at the midpoints of the approximating segments described
earlier, and further auxiliary curves can adjust the nature of the
interpolation.

Interpolating an array of lines along a line gives you a fence, a
brick wall, or half of a grille.  Interpolating an array of lines
along a curve can give you a ribbon, a suspension bridge, or a
sunburst.  Etc.

From a curve with speed you can extract a “normalized” curve that has
lost its speed information, making it equivalent to the distance along
the curve.

Any of these nonscalar attributes, intrinsic or aesthetic, can be
pseudorandomized by adding deterministic noise, which can have varying
frequencies and amplitudes.

By making these attributes potentially time-dependent, we have
animations.

Stroking a curve produces another curve, one we typically fill with
black; but we can use it to clip a texture in order to get many other
kinds of curves.

The ends of open curves are special; we can mark them with arrowheads.

Reducing abstraction overhead
-----------------------------

A stencil that is merely copied wholesale into another drawing is
already useful, and turning a drawing into such a stencil is
conceptually trivial.  Nothing about the drawing need be explicitly
abstracted, and it is then subject to whatever manipulations are
available in its destination environment, which may include things
like rotation, scaling, clipping, colorspace transformation,
convolution, alpha-blending, skewing, and cutting into pieces.  (An
image that has already been made so concrete that it consists only of
pixels may not rotate as well, though, and one that has been merged
with a transparent background may need some extra flying-matte work to
re-abstract it to use in a new situation.)

But often these leave something to be desired.  Scaling can change
stroke widths, for example, and sometimes the original stroke width is
desired; in other cases, bringing in stroke widths and colors from the
new environment is necessary to get it to “look right”.  And you may
want to change the text, adjust a rectangle to meet up with another
graphic element, and so on.

However, often the biggest issue is that it’s just very fiddly to
convert a concrete graphical object into something that can be reused.
The overhead of “abstraction”, even when no detail is actually being
removed, eliminates the majority of opportunities in mainstream
programs.

Enabling individual drawn strokes in a drawing to be used as
“stencils” in context, providing immediate feedback as they are
edited, and making the combining facilities more flexible may help
with this problem.

Constraint drawing and optimization
-----------------------------------

Sutherland’s SKETCHPAD, SolidWorks, SolveSpace, and FreeCAD are four
well-known constraint-drawing systems; their drawings contain graphic
objects whose concrete parts are held in relation to one another by
non-unidirectional constraints.  (See file `relational-modeling` for
some more thoughts about this, generalized beyond purely graphical
applications.)

Constraint-based drawing has a potentially very flexible interface for
combining drawings, even if only points can be constrained to be
equal (this can enable one object to fit with another).

SKETCHPAD solved its constraints iteratively by a sort of optimization
approach.  It’s common for drawings to have some kind of desiderata
they would like to optimize — it's best if arrows don't pass through
boxes in box-and-arrow diagrams, for example, or kink too much or
cross each other at shallow angles, but any of these can be
acceptable.

Particle systems
----------------

A seed leaps along a trajectory, curving under gravity, depositing
branch segments behind it until it flames out; periodically a leaf
sprouts.  Your mouse draws an arch, from which explode a thousand
sparks, each of which seeks a consistent distance from its neighbors
before sprouting a tapered, curved eyebrow hair.  Randomly sprayed
points sprout into randomly rotated copies of a mother sand-grain
polygon, each with its vertices perturbed slightly differently, and
they repel until all their surfaces are a minimal distance apart.  One
by one, slightly inconsistently sized bubbles appear at the nearest
bubble boundary at a source, and bubbles shift and move until every
bubble is in equilibrium.

How can these systems, so seemingly simple to describe, be simple to
create, debug, and tweak interactively?  Does the temporal description
help or hinder?