Doing the crude experiments documented in file `aluminum-foil-spif`, I
was surprised to learn how thin aluminum foil is — in the neighborhood
of 10 μm, though heavy-duty foil is 25 μm.  I had thought it was
considerably thicker because of its strength and tendency to retain
creases.

So it occurred to me that maybe cut, laminated, and creased aluminum
foil, or for that matter steel foil, was a potentially useful material
for self-replicating machinery, along the lines of cardboard
furniture.  The fact that aluminum foil is so thin means that you can
increase its rigidity immensely by forming it into relatively small
parts, which would then have the stiffness to easily bend the
still-flat foil.

Stiffening by forming
---------------------

Consider, for example, forming a corrugated sheet from aluminum foil
similar to the corrugated iron sheets commonly used for the roofing of
military bases and other slums.  If you make it 10 mm thick, then you
have about ¼ of the foil resisting tension on the outside of the bend
with a lever arm of 5 mm, ¼ of it resisting compression on the inside
in the same way, and the other ½ resisting tension and compression
with an average lever arm of 2½ mm; the average lever arm is then
3¾ mm, while in the untouched sheet, the average lever arm might be
2½ μm.  So the corrugated sheet is on the order of 1500 times stiffer.
It’s fucking magic.

(There’s an additional work-hardening factor if you’re working with
ordinary aluminum foil from the grocery stre, which is annealed,
rather than whatever comes out of your aluminum-foil-making machine on
the moon or whatever.)

That also works for increasing flexural strength (in the sense of the
bending force on a member needed to provoke plastic deformation, not
the stricter sense of the tensile stress in the fibers of the material
needed to provoke plastic deformation) and resistance to buckling, but
there’s no such magic for increasing tensile strength — although
perhaps you could use the folded aluminum as a mold to be filled with
some other material.

Origami
-------

There’s a bunch of work in computational origami for things like
unfolding satellite space shades, which unfortunately I don’t know
anything about.  Robert Lang is the big name in computational origami,
and satellite space shades are folded with the Miura fold.  My level
of origami is basically that I can fold an origami crane, so I did
that using this aluminum foil.  It wrinkled considerably more than
paper does, but it also creases better.  To get the square to fold it
from, I cut along the edge using my zirconia knife, a process which
required only the tip of the blade, the last 30 μm or so — so
presumably you could do the same thing with a 30-μm-long blade, which
wouldn’t require very much sharpened zirconia or alumina or similar
material.

(At some point I had dropped the knife on its tip and chipped it, so
last week I bought a 750-grit diamond hone and sharpened the tip on it
with some dish detergent.)

There’s a “Handbook of Compliant Mechanisms” from 2013 out of the BYU
flexures research group, published by Wiley; nearly half of it is a
rather poor-quality “library of compliant mechanisms”, much of which
consists of things that can be cut out of a sheet but then flex into a
three-dimensional shape (to which they have given the name “lamina
emergent mechanisms”).  The book doesn’t mention origami at all, and
much of the book focuses on techniques that are difficult or
impossible to apply to origami.  To me it seems clear that origami is
an important technique for flexure fabrication, and it turns out that
Magleby and Howell, two of the editors of the “Handbook”, published a
couple of papers on this, even before the Handbook came out.  So I’m
not sure why they didn’t include anything about this in the book.

Some traditional origami forms, like the flapping-wing bird and the
jumping frog, are designed as flexures; these are called “action
origami” or sometimes “kinetic origami” (a term due to Magleby and/or
his coauthors in a 2011 paper).  Papers typically analyze these as
rigid flat panels connected by flexible hinges at the folds, a model
which seems unmotivated by physical considerations — in paper
typically the folds are slightly less rigid than the panels in the
“hinge” direction, but in aluminum foil, they are typically slightly
more rigid.

Many of the annoying features of aluminum, such as its high cost,
large springback, abrasive nature, and tendency to accumulate internal
stresses during heating that produce delayed distortions, are less
important in this situation.

Because the aluminum is about ten times thinner than paper, but only
2.7 g/cc (according to file `compressed-sensing-microscope`), this
aluminum is about a third as heavy as paper, square millimeter for
square millimeter.  Consequently the crane is much lighter than a
paper crane of the same size would be, rather astoundingly light.
Unfortunately, it isn’t very sturdy; I can plastically deform it by
blowing on it.  Work-hardened (unannealed) foil or a more reinforced
design might help with this.

Foil properties, and comparison to paper
----------------------------------------

The foil is really amazingly flexible for its strength.  According to
[the Wikipedia tensile-strength article], annealed aluminum has a
yield strength in the neighborhod of 15–20 MPa, a Young’s modulus of
70 GPa, and an ultimate strength (“engineering”, I suppose, calculated
according to the original material thickness) of 40–50 MPa, from which
we can deduce that its plastic strain is about 0.2%–0.3%, while its
yield strain is about 0.6%–0.7% (engineering, I suppose).  So
plastically creasing the foil involves bending it at a radius such
that the inner surface is 0.2%–0.3% shorter than the centerline, and
the outer surface is 0.2%–0.3% longer, so a bend radius of 1.7 to
2.5 mm.

[the Wikipedia tensile-strength article]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensile_strength

The same article, though, points out that aluminum alloys are
immensely stronger: 414 MPa yield and 483 MPa ultimate for 2014-T6 and
248 MPa ultimate for 6063-T6 (a tempered grade of a general-purpose
“wrought” alloy), though their [elastic modulus is about the
same][Aluminium alloy].  The very common [6061-T6] is 275 MPa yield
and 310 MPa ultimate, with 69 GPa Young’s modulus, roughly the same.
These alloys are precipitation-hardened; annealed 6061 (“6061-O”) has
only about 55 MPa of yield strength and only about 125 MPa of ultimate
tensile strength, but elongation of 25%–30%, so it might make sense to
perform the origami on the annealed material and then heat-treat the
finished product to precipitation-harden it, gaining an additional
factor of 5 in resistance to deformation.

[Aluminium alloy]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aluminium_alloy
[6061-T6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/6061_aluminium_alloy

How does it compare to paper?  According to file `uhmwpe-clothes`, the
tensile strength of cellulose is in the neighborhood of 40 MPa, but
when paper tears, it commonly tears because the different cellulose
fibers have come apart, not because all the fibers are failing at the
crack, as when you cut it with scissors; the tear tends to rotate into
an orientation near parallel to the surface as it propagates in order
to break even less fibers, even though this spreads the failure over a
larger surface.  This is also why cotton paper like that used in
dollar bills is harder to tear.  Unfortunately, this leaves me little
wiser!

Cellulose at room temperature is normally thought of as a brittle
material, one which fails without an intermediate plastic-deformation
stage, and indeed when you tear paper there isn’t a noticeable
stretched-paper area at the tip of the tear, nor does the edge formed
by the tear crinkle in paper the way it does in aluminum foil.  But
this would predict that creasing paper should be impossible — like
polyester napkins, the paper should just elastically return to its
original form unless fibers were actually broken.  Fibers *are*
actually broken, as evidenced by the tendency of a tear to follow even
a simple paper crease, but by itself that doesn’t explain the tendency
of paper to elastically return to the creased orientation — it would
only explain its tendency to be more flexible at the crease.

At first, I thought we couldn’t explain paper’s tendency to hold
creases through some kind of non-cellulose interaction, because
cellophane holds creases too, and I thought cellophane was pure
cellulose; but it turns out that cellophane also contains glycerin as
a plasticizer.  Presumably this very plasticity is what allows it to
hold creases.

This suggests that paper holds creases by altering the interactions of
cellulose fibers.  On the inner radius of the crease, there is
presumably some thickness of the paper that is crushed into rubble,
around which is wrapped a series of layers of cellulose fibers loosely
stuck together, either by other materials present in the paper or by
interactions among fibers that touch one another.  The fibers in these
layers slide past one another and dig into inner layers during the
creasing process, and perhaps in the outermost layers are broken by
the tension.  This leaves the natural length of the layers altered,
causing the paper to elastically maintain the crease.  This hypothesis
is Original Research™ and therefore may be entirely wrong, but it
gives me a reasonable alternative to supposing that the cellulose is
deforming plastically.