The most conventional way to plot the Mandelbrot set and similar
fractals is to compute the “escape time” for each pixel (the number of
iterations needed for the point to exceed some “bailout value” beyond
which we can be sure there is no return) and use it as an index into a
cyclic one-dimensional “palette” of colors.  For example, if it takes
a given pixel 331 iterations to exceed the bailout value, and our
palette is of 256 colors, we draw that pixel as color #75 from that
palette.

8-bit color
-----------

In the early-1990s days of 8-bit color like VGA and cgsix, this
approach had some very significant virtues.  These devices required a
number of compromises.  Redrawing a whole high-resolution screen
involved more memory bandwidth than our graphics cards could manage
during a video frame (typically 13.9 ms rather than the modern 16.7
ms); full-screen video games like Doom and Quake typically ran at
reduced resolution, and video, when it was possible at all, typically
played in a postage-stamp-sized window.  And, although they could
typically display 262,144 different colors, they could only display
256 of them at a time, so that the framebuffer could be only 8 bits
deep; full-color images needed to be dithered down to 256 colors for
display.  Many algorithms were devised to formulate optimal palettes
for approximating a given image and dithering to those palettes with
different tradeoffs between CPU usage, spatial sharpness, color
fidelity, and crawling artifacts in video; we still see these today in
animated GIFs.  A few demos changed palette entries while the screen
was being painted in order to get 256 colors per scan line instead of
256 colors per screen, but this technique required very tricky timing,
and perhaps as a result never saw general use.  Mozilla (later renamed
“Netscape”), which had to display more than one image at a time,
settled on dithering all images to a standard 216-color palette (6
levels of red, 6 of green, 6 of blue) and so WWW pages that wanted to
avoid this extra dithering would use only these “web safe” colors.

It’s perhaps worth mentioning that DRAM cost US$40 per megabyte from
about 1992 to about 1996, due to a price-fixing cartel among RAM
manufacturers during this time, so a 1280×1024 framebuffer required
US$50 worth of RAM if it was 8 bits deep, a number which soared to
US$150 for 24 bits, and that’s not even including a second buffer for
page-flipping double-buffering.  So only specialized high-end video
cards like Targas and the ones in Silicon Graphics machines offered
24-bit color (“TrueColor”) or even the 16-bit “TrueColor” that is now
universal on hand computers (“cellphones”).

The escape-time-indexed-palette approach provided a few great
benefits, some of which are specific to the hardware of the time:

1. It ensured that the image used only 256 colors, so no dithering was
   needed; the display hardware could display the image natively.

2. It allowed “color cycling”, in which the screen was updated by
   altering the hardware palette (once per frame) rather than
   repainting pixels into the framebuffer — functionality TrueColor
   cards couldn’t match.  Color cycling as such involved cyclicly
   permuting the entries in the palette.  The famous Amiga
   bouncing-ball demo used a form of color cycling to fake real-time
   high-resolution 3-D on hardware that couldn’t come close to doing
   it for real; updating the palette was also a common technique to
   smoothly fade images to black.

3. It gives you a whole orthogonal dimension of expressivity for
   fractal images.  You can put a color gradient in part of the
   palette, followed by a sharply contrasting color starting a
   different gradient, or a sequence of sharply contrasting colors, or
   colors alternating between two gradients.  These techniques can
   produce very different images when applied to the same mapping from
   pixel coordinates to escape times, emphasizing some aspects of the
   image while soft-pedaling other parts.  Furthermore, you can apply
   all of this instantly to an already-completed image — an enormous
   advantage on hardware where even a simple Mandelbrot took several
   seconds to render.

4. In many cases, it produced large areas of solid color, which
   permits popular lossless compression algorithms (like the LZW used
   in GIF) to compress the image substantially.

Another popular option was to use palettes in the same way, but index
them with something other than the escape time.  For example, if you
use the argument of the bailout-exceeding value to index into the
palette, each region that would have been a solid color with the
escape-time algorithm instead becomes a cyclic progression through the
colors — a gradient, perhaps — typically repeating N times.

Generalizing palettes
---------------------

This suggests a useful generalization of the palette concept to me.
The initial fractal rendering process computes for each pixel a vector
of result values: the number of iterations, the complex value of the
escaping value, and so on.  Different rendering processes might
produce different sets of values; presumably John Milnor’s
distance-estimation algorithm, for example, won’t produce those, but
it might produce a different vector.  Then the “palette” function maps
each such vector to a color.  One special case is to use just the
number of iterations modulo the length of a given list of colors, but
many others are possible.  Other special cases include Fractint’s
“outside=real” and “outside=imag” options, which add the real or
imaginary parts of the escaping point to the number of iterations
before indexing the palette, as well as an option “outside=tdis” to
use the total distance traveled by the orbit of the escaping point,
again cyclically indexing the palette with the result.  Fractint also
has a “biomorph” option, which is Clifford Pickover’s invention of
overriding the color that would otherwise be used (based on the
iteration count or whatever) with an image-wide constant if either the
real or the imaginary component of the escaping point is less than the
bailout.  And a “decomp” option, which overrides the outside color in
another similar way, which I think should be the same as
“outside=atan” but which doesn’t seem to be.  And so on.

But what if your “palette” were a two-dimensional color gradient,
indexed in one dimension by number of iterations and in another by the
angle of the escaping point?  What if the “palette” includes a truly
continuous gradient, rather than a 256-color approximation to one?
What if the “palette” varies with time, as in color cycling, but in a
more general fashion?
