Framed-belt-per-sample-rate signal-graph DSP on CPU
---------------------------------------------------

Lots of DSP stuff (time-domain FIR filters, IIR filters, Goertzel
filters, PLLs, a lot of music synthesis stuff) can be formulated as
computing a bunch of quantities for each input sample.  The quantities
may depend on the input sample, the current values of other quantities
(let's call them variables), or even past values of other quantities
at some fixed lag into the past.

For a given sample rate, I think you can store these quantities very
efficiently in a ring buffer of “frames”.  Each frame has a specific
fixed offset for each variable, at least those that are used in the
future; they are like structs or function stack frames.  A piece of
straight-line code computes the new contents of all of the variables
of interest, storing them into their appropriate places in the frame;
it can index off a frame base pointer to refer to other values in the
current or previous frame (although hopefully it already has those in
registers) or even earlier frames.

When the ring buffer is close to being full, you must write each new
frame in two places: a place near the end, and a place near the
beginning.  In this way, when you need to reset the frame pointer to
near the beginning of the buffer, you don’t need to copy a bunch of
frames at that point, and your indexing operations don’t all need
bitmasks on them in order to make the ring buffer circular.  The
buffer must be at least twice the size of your processing window (the
furthest into the past you ever need to reach, e.g. the number of FIR
taps) for this to work.

Perhaps there might be some values computed that you don’t save in
this belt of frames, thus reducing the space needed.

FIR filters implemented in this way will access memory with a larger
stride than FIR filters implemented in the normal way, but I’m not
sure that will cause memory bandwidth problems with modern CPUs.

Any fixed topology of single-rate signal transformers can
straightforwardly be transformed into a straight-line piece of code
that works in this way.

For image processing, where you generate a frame per pixel, you might
want to arrange access to belts for previous rows as well.  The idea
is that any reasonable (Δx, Δy, varname) tuple maps to some constant
and reasonably small offset from the current frame base pointer.
Tiling might make this more feasible, by preventing the Δy aspect from
generating unreasonably huge offsets.