Buenos Aires is about 300 km from Rosario.  There's a train that runs
twice a day, taking seven hours.  The Flutter embedded wireless
device, due to ship in 2014 for US$20 with a few kilobits per second
and about a 1km radius of communication, could conceivably be thrown
out the window of the train at regular intervals to provide a
low-bandwidth, low-power communications relay line between the two
cities; you would need perhaps 500 of the devices, for a total cost of
US$10 000.  This sounds like a lot of money but actually I think it's
orders of magnitude cheaper than running a conventional communication
line over such a distance; and it ought to decrease by another factor
of two or three in the near future.

The remaining problems, then, would be to power the devices and to
protect them from sabotage.  

First, power.  Nonrechargeable batteries will only last a year or two,
maybe less in the sun.  Small nickel-cadmium or nickel-metal-hydride
cells might last five or ten years; but the problem remains to harvest
sufficient power from the environment to supply the communication
line.  The device might use 2W in operation, so 2mW of photovoltaic
power per device, with adequately efficient power harvesting, might be
sufficient.

Second, protection.  It's probably not practical to harden 500 such
devices to make them impractical to break, but you could probably make
them hard to find by concealing them inside of pieces of garbage.
This also suggests a way to deploy them from the train without
arousing suspicion: every 50 seconds, on average, one member of the
planting team throws a piece of garbage (say, a food package)
containing a wireless transceiver out the window.  The train ticket
costs US$2.50, so you could buy 4000 trips (2000 round trips) for the
cost of the needed devices; so one person could do this in a practical
fashion over some 50 to 100 trips, so two or three months.  Ten people
could do it in five or ten trips each.

You still need to prevent the devices from being detected by their
radio emissions and destroyed, which is difficult if they're basically
stationary.  The best defense against this, other than spread-spectrum
and using legal frequencies (the Flutter devices use a 915MHz
frequency that's legal for unlicensed use in the US only) is very low
duty cycle and very long periods of time between transmissions — days
to weeks.  This suggests that all the devices should wake up their
receivers periodically at a synchronized time to see if they're being
activated, say a few times a day, but not transmit anything unless a
circuit is opened.

(Alternatively you could use store-and-forward transmission, but this
would result in message latency of months.)

The desire to support solar power, combined with the desire to look
like garbage, poses the problem of how to have solar cells that are
not exposed to sunlight.  This seems impossible, but keep in mind that
we only need about 2mW.  At the 5% efficiency typical of cheap
thin-film cells used for solar calculators and the like, this is
1 cm²; it could be 4 or 5 cm² that's not directly exposed to sun, for
example behind a layer of paper.

A perhaps more useful project would connect an off-the-grid location
rather than a major city, and could be deployed by bicycle rather than
train.  There are locations in the Tigre delta, for example, that have
electrical power but no broadband internet access.

