You can get a very good approximation of the Gaussian function by
convolving several box or simple-moving-average filters, in the same
way that you get a good approximation of it with a spline, in a way
that I don’t quite know how to name right now, but which is exactly
equivalent to convolving several box filters.

From a computational perspective, notable features of this procedure
include that box filters require no multiplications, require a very
small number of operations per sample (only two additions and a
subtraction, plus a FIFO buffer of the size of the box), and can be
computed exactly with integer math in which the intermediate results
overflow, as long as the final result does not.  XXX is that even
true?  WTF

Precisely converting discretely sampled signals back into bandlimited
continuous signal involves convolving them with the sinc function (the
Fourier transform of the unit pulse) which is inconvenient because it
decays very slowly, meaning that doing the convolution directly (in
the spatial domain) requires summing weighted contributions from quite
far away to get reasonable accuracy.  If you just do a zero-order
hold, turning the sampled curve into stairsteps, you are in effect
convolving the modulated Dirac comb that is your discretely sampled
signal with a unit pulse, thus filtering its frequency response with a
sinc spectrum, which is disastrous for frequencies above about half
Nyquist.

One approach to reconstruction filtering is to use Nth-order splines
that pass through y=1 at x=0 and have zeroes at all other integers.
(These are sometimes called cardinal B-splines, by analogy to the sinc
“sinus cardinalis” function, but that terminology is arguably wrong
and at least confusing.)  These have very compact support, and they
approach sinc in the limit where N → ∞.  But they definitely require
multiplication.

Derivatives of the Gaussian include the so-called Mexican Hat wavelet,
Ricker wavelet, or Marr wavelet, which is its negated second
derivative.  This is vaguely close to sinc: it has a big round bulge
in the middle with a zero on each side of it, then local minima, and
then it asymptotically approaches zero as it goes to infinity.

I have this idea that the second derivative of the convolution of a
signal with the Gaussian is equal to the convolution of the signal
with the second derivative of the Gaussian, because both
differentiation and convolution with something are linear
time-invariant transforms.  But now I’m not sure if that’s true.

The Mexican Hat Wavelet page on Wikipedia says, “In practice, this
wavelet [in multiple dimensions] is sometimes approximated by the
difference of Gaussians function, because the DoG is separable.”  If
this is true (it’s not backed up by the reference given) then it seems
like a better way to convolve things with that wavelet in most cases
would be to use the procedure I’ve outlined above to approximate the
convolution using the Gaussian-then-differentiate approach.
Convolving five box filters gives you a quartic approximation of a
Gaussian; its second derivative is then a quadratic approximation of
the Mexican Hat Wavelet.  Note that this entire computation requires
no multiplication.

Higher derivatives might also be useful, as they oscillate more times
and hit more zeroes before dying out; they are the Hermite functions
multiplied by the Gaussian.  Their zeroes aren’t really in the right
places, but that error might not be large enough to matter; H₄ has
zeroes at ±sqrt((3±sqrt(6))/2)), which is about ±0.523 and ±1.650.
That doesn’t oscillate nearly fast enough to be a good approximation
for sinc.  The higher-order Hermite polynomials’ roots have a similar
problem: their zeroes are roughly evenly spaced, while sinc has an
double wide space at x=0 where there would normally be a root.

These derivatives do, however, look very much like delicious
zero-phase FIR narrow bandpass filter kernels, which are more or less
like the Gabor kernel.  So they may not be that useful for signal
reconstruction, but maybe they could be very useful for narrow
bandpass signal processing!

I thought maybe it was just as bad for reconstruction that the
higher-order Gaussian derivatives vanished very quickly, but maybe
that’s just an unavoidable artifact of a reasonable degree of
locality, which is not an altogether bad thing.

(I got a lot of this information from
<http://bmia.bmt.tue.nl/people/bromeny/MICCAI2008/Materials/05%20Gaussian%20derivatives%20MMA6.pdf>,
which even mentions the use of Gaussian derivatives as bandpass kernel
filters.)
