Trying to calculate caustics (see files `caustics` and
`caustic-simulation`) and “Windy” Oona Raisanen’s oscilloscope traces
and whatnot, it occurred to me that there’s a very simple solution.

Let’s think about caustics first.  You have some uniform light density
ρ on some original surface, you know, a caustic generator, and that
density gets splayed across some other surface in some nonuniform but
computable and continuous way.  If you want to find the density at a
pixel of the caustic, the simple solution is to take the *inverse* of
that computable, continuous mapping, and map the pixel center point
through it; it will give you zero or more points on the generator,
since the inverse is not, in general, a function.  You need to sum the
density from those zero or more points.

The density from each point, however, depends on the “focusing” from
that point on the generator (which may be infinite).  Consider a small
parcel of area ε around the point on the generator.  This parcel, with
total brightness ρε, gets spread over some area on the caustic, which
is some function of the partial derivative matrix of location on the
caustic according to location on the generator.  I think maybe it’s
the determinant.  Anyway, then you take the reciprocal of that, and
you get the brightness contribution at that point.  (You may want to
add some small value to the absolute value of the reciprocal to
prevent singularities, analogous to how the finite spatial coherency
of light in space prevents singularities in the electromagnetic
field.)

I think that you can do this more efficiently in the usual cases by
computing not just this brightness but also its gradient in the
neighborhood of the sample pixel.  Then you can do the full
calculation of the inverse and its gradient at some subset of points,
like 1/16 or 1/64 or something, and just interpolate at other points.

If your sample points are evenly spaced, this is a lot like the
algorithm for computing Perlin noise, except that not just the
gradient but also the base brightness value is nonzero at the sampled
point.  And of course it’s not random.

However, I think you can do better than this with an approach similar
to raymarching with signed distance functions.  You don’t need very
many samples in areas with very uniform gradients, and in areas where
the gradients are changing rapidly, you need a lot of samples.  You
can try to approximate this by sampling the derivative matrix of the
gradient (is that the Jacobian?) or you can compute the gradient over
an area using interval arithmetic, rather than at a point using
ordinary arithmetic.

(Yes, that’s the Jacobian, and the Jacobian determinant gives you the
brightness, or the reciprocal brightness, depending on which Jacobian
you’re considering.)

In the case of Raisanen’s oscilloscope traces, we have to solve the
same problem once for each column of oscilloscope pixels.  Within that
time interval, our brightness is spread out uniformly over a single
dimension of time, but there may be very many points in time that map
to the same vertical pixel.  We can sum the reciprocals of the
(absolute plus epsilon) derivative of the waveform at these points to
get the total brightness deposited at the pixel.  And, as before, if
the second derivative is very small, we don’t need to sample very
densely.

In both cases, of course, we could avoid the inverse problem and just
iterate over parcels of the generator.  But I think that’s almost
certain to lead to sampling some areas far too densely while sampling
other areas far too sparsely.

Or will it?  Approximating the inverse function, in the general case,
seems like it’ll mostly depend on that same kind of sampling, so it
may not actually gain us anything to start from the pixels on the
caustic rather than the generator.

