Golang and Rust have a lot of similarities, some stemming from their
birth around the same time in groups of programmers
with similar backgrounds and overlapping goals, and others due to
direct borrowing.

Both use the C memory model of nested records and arrays with
pointers, but add automatic memory management — a garbage collector in
Golang’s case, an innovative affine typing system in Rust’s case
(although Rust was born with a GC, it became garbage along the way and
has been collected).  This is a huge and underappreciated difference
from mainstream garbage-collected languages like JS, Java, and Python,
in which memory is just an object graph.

Both have interface inheritance but not implementation inheritance
(and both use the keyword `struct` where C++ would use `class`).  In
both, an existing type can be retroactively caused to implement a
newly invented interface (called a “trait” in Rust), but only in Rust
does this permit you to add new methods to an existing type.

Both languages have untyped constants, where a number like `0` or
`3.14` in the source code doesn’t have a fully determined type — the
precision of its type is determined by its context of use.

Both languages have limited type inference, eliminating nearly all
type declarations for local variables but requiring nearly full type
declarations for top-level module items.  In both cases, the designers
made the misguided choice to cede the `=` operator to mutation, while
using a somewhat more verbose locution for the more common operation
of declaring and initializing a variable.  Rust’s type system supports
full parametric polymorphism, while Golang’s type system, like C’s,
has some parametrically polymorphic types, but no mechanism to define
new ones.

Both languages have very limited use of exceptions in the sense of
nonlocal transfers of control (which both call “panics”), instead
handling normal errors using return values somewhat richer than are
practical in C and similar languages.  In both languages, unused-value
messages from the compiler prevent you from accidentally suppressing
an error signaled by this mechanism.  In both languages, the mechanism
to explicitly ignore such an error is to assign it to a pseudovariable
called `_`, a language feature I think both copied from ML.

In both languages, there is a dichotomy between “arrays” and “slices”,
which last are pointer-plus-length references to part of an array,
while array sizes are statically known.  Array indexing is checked at
runtime in both languages.

Strings in both languages are sequences of implicitly UTF-8 bytes,
rather than sequences of UTF-16 encoding units (as in Java and JS), of
UCS-4 codepoints (as in Python), or bytes that each implicitly encode
a character (as in C).

Both languages propose nonmainstream concurrency mechanisms in order
to escape the disadvantages of pure event-loop languages like ordinary
JS and implicit-shared-everything languages like Java (and C or C++
with pthreads or Win32).  Rust’s novel type system statically prevents
data races between threads; Golang has lightweight threads
(“goroutines”) and supports shared mutable state with the same
concurrent-access bugs that Java does (and, at least originally,
didn’t even try to prevent segfaults from concurrent access to the
same map), but provides special syntax for interthread communication
over type-safe channels to minimize the use of shared mutable state.

Both languages add a simpler syntax for iterating over a range.  In
both languages, the range representation is half-open, including its
left bound and excluding its right bound.  Both of these are so
universal nowadays that they hardly seem worth mentioning, but
e.g. C, Java, and JS lack range syntax, and R, Matlab, and Fortran
fail to use the half-open representation.

Both languages have acclaimed library package management systems
(Cargo and `go get`) with integrated network access.  Rust leans more
heavily on its package manager in the sense that its standard library
includes almost nothing — its `std::net` module, for example,
implements no protocols higher-level than TCP, and it apparently
offers no way to format a timestamp, parse a CSV file, or encrypt a
string, although it does have things like binary heaps, hash tables,
pathname handling, and some limited Unicode encoding.  By contrast,
Golang’s standard library includes AES, ELF, DER, CRC, JPEG, suffix
arrays, RFC-2822, SMTP, URLs, and JSON-RPC.  In Rust these are
available as external crates, except apparently there’s no SMTP
server; crates.io lists 7542 crates.

Both languages have syntactic support for user-defined external
iterators, which sounds like a minor detail but turned out to be
absolutely transformative to Python when Ka-Ping Yee introduced it.

The biggest difference seems to me that Rust focuses on static safety,
even at the cost of programmer convenience, in a way that Golang does
not.  So, while in Golang it’s common to define functions or data
structures that pass around `interface{}` references — which can be
converted to interfaces of the proper type with a run-time-checked
type conversion — in Rust such practices are virtually nonexistent,
instead using its parametric polymorphism facilities.  In Golang all
references are implicitly initialized to `nil` (as in Java, but much
less problematically due to the difference in memory models), while in
Rust null references are statically impossible, being supplanted by
the `Option` type and pattern matching, which doesn’t exist in Golang.

I’m tempted to make the analogy to the Pascal/C dichotomy of the
1970s: Rust, like Pascal, prioritizes static correctness and
mathematical purity, while Golang, like C, prioritizes programmer
convenience, practicality, and compatibility from one month to the
next.

I think things might turn out differently this time around, though.
First, probably no programming language will ever again be as dominant
as C was during the 1980s; neither Rust nor Golang is likely to die
within the next century.  Second, static verification has become
dramatically more effective over the last 40 years, which means that
you can get a lot more safety with a lot less hassle.  Third, we can
afford a lot more CPU cycles and RAM for running compilers nowadays,
even if running the C++ preprocessor over hundreds of gigabytes of
repetitively `#include`d header files is not a particularly productive
use of those CPU cycles.  Fourth, cooperation with many other
programmers is more important now than in the 1970s, and static safety
helps a lot with that.
