Everything we make has some minimum mechanical strength to keep it
from breaking at undesirable moments, whether a spoon, a skyscraper, a
scarf, a sedan, or a circuit; and this strength has several different
components, including resistance to tension, compression, shear,
flexion, and impact, which trade off against one another to some
extent.  Also, we make many things with more material than is needed
for its mere mechanical strength, in order to make them more rigid.
As described in file `sandwich-theory`, scaling laws are such that
many of our large structures fail by buckling, which is limited by
rigidity rather then tensile strength, compressive strength, shear
strength, or impact toughness; and we take advantage of this by
producing structures like I-beams, structural tubing, and sandwich
panels which have greater rigidity for the same mass.

But I got to thinking about the implications for very small
structures, and I came to some astonishing conclusions about the
possibilities of massively parallel automated fabrication, even
without molecular nanotechnology.

Think about the aspect ratio of the legs of a daddy-long-legs.

Scaling down a highway sign
---------------------------

But consider scaling down a highway sign.  It’s cantilevered out over
the highway on a steel truss to support its weight and occasional wind
loadings.  The truss is made of angle irons, L-shaped profiles
extruded or bent from sheet steel.  To make up some dimensions, let’s
suppose the angle irons are 6 mm thick, and each leg of the L is 30 mm
long, and the truss is in the form of a square beam 500 mm across and
5 m long, any given cross-section of which has 8 angle irons running
through it for a total of almost three thousand square millimeters of
steel out of the 250,000 square millimeters of the cross-section.
(This puts the weight of the truss itself in a bit over 100 kg.)
Perhaps the truss can safely support a tonne of road sign and whatnot
at this 5-meter lever arm, despite being almost 99% empty space.

Now, suppose we scale it down by a linear factor of 100.  Now it is 50
mm long and 5 mm across, weighing a bit over 100 milligrams, and the
road sign has shrunk from a tonne to a gram.  The moment at the base
of the truss has gone from 49 kN m to .00049 N m, a decrease of not
six but eight orders of magnitude.  But the steel cross-section in
tension at the top of the truss has diminished by only four orders of
magnitude.  So, while previously it was near stressed to near its
yield stress, now it is four orders of magnitude away from its yield
stress.  Suppose its Young’s modulus is 200 GPa; its elongation might
previously have been 0.07%, or about 3 mm, but now it is 0.000007%, or
about 3 nanometers.

This means that we can thin out our angle irons quite a bit.  We
scaled them down from being 6 mm thick to being 60 microns thick,
which is about six times as thick as common aluminum foil (see file
`aluminum-foil-spif`).  If we managed to scale them down by four
orders of magnitude, they would be 6 nanometers thick, and would still
be able to hold up the one-gram model highway sign, with the same
relative deformation and safety factor under its scaled-down load as
the original full-scale highway sign.

This change would change our model truss from being 99% empty space,
or rather air space, to being 99.9999% empty space.  Instead of 100
milligrams, it would weigh 10 micrograms, which it turns out is about
0.8% of the weight of the air in its air space.  It’s 99.2% air by
mass now, lighter than the lightest silica aerogel.

However, removing 99.99% of its remaining solid material has also
removed 99.99% of its tensile and compressive strength.  While
previously its tensile and compressive strength was proportionally 100
times greater than those of the full-scale highway sign, now they are
100 times less.  So perhaps it will fail in some other way when trying
to support the model highway sign; we might need as much as a full
milligram of steel to provide the necessary tensile and compressive
strength.  But at this scale we are no longer obliged to provide
massive amounts of unnecessary tensile and compressive strength merely
to get adequate rigidity and flexural strength.

(The very light model highway sign would probably be unable to
withstand much of a breeze.)

Now, we can’t actually do this with steel; it isn’t malleable enough
to roll that thin, and in contact with air, I doubt 6-nanometer-thick
steel foil would last long.

Gold leaf
---------

However, we can do it with gold leaf, which is typically 0.2 microns
thick (according to file `compressed-sensing-microscope`) and stable
in Earth’s atmosphere.  Normally we think of gold as being an
extremely expensive material to build things out of; it currently
costs US$1480 per troy ounce.  But if we only need a milligram of gold
to build our model, that’s only 5 cents at that price.  We also think
of it as being impractically soft and weak, but with the relative
strength boost we get from scaling down in this way, we no longer need
the brute strength of steel for most things.

Gold leaf is delicate enough that you need to use special hand tools
and blowing of air to manipulate it without breaking it.  More
practical for many uses may be gold foil, which comes in thicknesses
of 1 micron to 10 microns.

Carbon nanotubes
----------------

Carbon nanotubes are thinner than gold leaf as well as stronger, and
they are also stable in air.  They may provide a better material than
gold leaf or gold foil.

Glass fiber, basalt fiber, and silica crystals
----------------------------------------------

These materials are also stable in air and are stronger than gold as
well as lighter; short enough spun fibers (or cut crystals) will not
buckle under compression.  You can build trusses out of them if you
can make joints, but often at these scales the problem is not so much
getting things to stick together as avoiding catastrophic accidental
stiction and cold-welding.

Metamaterials: rigidity instead of strength?
--------------------------------------------

More generally we can think of the existing nearly-isotropic bulk
materials we routinely build things from — steel, cement, brass,
glass, and so on — as meeting their rigidity requirements at a low
space cost by virtue of spending a lot of mass on the problem.
Historically we’ve been able to sometimes get lower mass (and lower
cost!) by using wood instead, when we can afford a larger volume.
Wood is a nanostructured metamaterial, but it, too, is somewhat
optimized for low volume, perhaps so that trees can resist wind but I
think largely so that they can resist predation.  Balsa wood,
pith-core trees and the remarkable moringa demonstrate the existence
of other possibilities.

Suppose that by using trusses made of gold, glass fiber, or carbon
nanotubes, we can produce metamaterials with much better
stiffness-to-density ratios.  Will this enable us to use only enough
material to provide the tensile and compressive strength and impact
resistance we need, in macroscopic structures?  Maybe not, because the
rigidity of a structure and the modulus of elasticity of a material
(or metamaterial) are different things.

In file `plastic-cutters` I say ASTM A36 steel has a Young’s modulus
of 200 GPa, and like iron and steels in general, a density of 7.9
g/cc; that makes its stiffness-to-density ratio 25 kJ/g.  [Balsa wood
has density ranging up to 0.38 g/cc and axial Young’s modulus up to 9
GPa][0], giving a surprisingly lower, and similar, 24 kJ/g.

[0]: https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/108580 "Marc Borrega and Lorna Gibson, Mechanics of Balsa (Ochroma pyramidale) wood, 2015"

Why are these so similar?  Maybe because balsa wood’s axial
elasticity, like steel’s, comes from straining crystal lattices and
atomic bonds, and the particular crystal lattices and atomic bonds
involved aren’t enormously different, perhaps by a factor of 2.  Balsa
wood spreads them out over a larger cross-sectional area, the rest of
which is air, which contributes insignificant mass and stiffness; it
thus decreases its density and its Young’s modulus proportionally.
The same is true of, for example, steel tubing, which is as light as
balsa wood once its width is on the order of 100 times the thickness
of its walls.

There are really three contexts where we have to brute-force thicken
things up to get the rigidity we need instead of just spreading the
mass over a larger area.  One is where there’s some mechanical
constraint that makes the extra space unavailable: your truck has to
fit under bridges, your boring bar has to fit into the hole being
bored, your axle needs to fit through the bearing.  A second is where
we need something like *hardness*: the force that must be resisted is
being applied at a point or over a small area, and so we need a
concentration of material in that area to resist it.  A third is where
making the truss or honeycomb structure or whatever is difficult or
expensive because of the limitations of our fabrication technology,
and in general that’s a question of things being very small.

(Balsa wood is still better than any artificial material so far,
though.)

Flight
------

Very-low-density nanostructured materials made out of thin members
have a long history in flight; dandelion seeds, feathers, and
parachuting spiders are three examples.  Aside from the possibility of
lighter-than-air flight (a gold-leaf balloon made of two sheets sealed
together at the edges should be able to fly if you can fill its middle
with at least 4 mm of hydrogen or helium) the possibility of
ultralightweight metamaterials enabling insect-scale structures would
seem to offer many fascinating options.  Also, structures so delicate
that they could easily be blown away might be best off if far from the
ground.
