Digital TV has a severe “cliff effect”: due to the excellent
error-correction codes employed, you have no warning that the
signal-to-noise ratio is worsening until suddenly you can’t decode the
signal.  We can see this as an engineering deficiency — the channel
capacity has not fallen to zero, but probably to just below the bit
rate of the signal.  And in other situations, when the signal-to-noise
ratio was better, there was excess channel capacity that the system is
just wasting.

Analog TV, though worse in many ways, was better at this.  When the
signal levels were severely degraded, you’d see more noise on the
screen, which effectively amounts to a lower resolution.

Could you do something similar with digital TV?

Since the failure of the MBONE, the standard approach with internet TV
(CUSeeMe, YouTube, Skype, Netflix, etc.) is to downrez the stream
until the receiver is able to receive all of it.  Could you do
something similar without bidirectional transmission, e.g. for
recording media or broadcast TV?

Consider transmitting a 1920×1080 signal — first in 16-bit RGB without
compression, to simplify the discussion.  You can mipmap a 1920×1080
frame into a 240×135 frame, a 480×270 frame, a 960×540 frame, and a
1920×1080 frame.  If you do it by summing the 4 pixels in each
higher-resolution frame to get the corresponding pixel in the
lower-resolution frame, then someone in possession of any 4 of those
pixels can produce the fifth pixel.  This means that if you have
successfully received the lower-resolution frame, you would be
satisfied with ¾ of the pixels in the next-higher-resolution frame.

Since the higher-resolution has ¼ of the pixels, that would seem to
suggest that encoding the image in this way is “free”, in that it
doesn’t cost any extra bits, but that’s wrong; the lower-resolution
frames need more bits of precision to make this work.  But the cost is
moderate: if you have 5 bits of precision per color component in the
1920×1080 signal, you need 7 at 960×540, 9 at 480×270, and 11 at
240×135.  This totals to 35 186 400 bits, 4 398 300 bytes, while the
raw signal is 31 104 000 bits, so the cost is about 13%.  But the
smallest frame size is only 1 069 200 bits, about 3% of the total.

If you encode the smaller frame sizes with higher levels of
redundancy, then a receiver who’s experiencing more noise might be
able to receive the smaller frames even if the larger frames are lost.
If you double the redundancy at each mipmapping level, then in effect
you are using 5, 14, 36, and 88 bits per color component per pixel at
the different mipmapping levels, which gives you 58 708 800 total bits
per frame, almost twice the original bit rate.

Perhaps you can decrease this overhead by doing similar subsampling
along the time axis — update the smaller frames less frequently,
without the ¾ reduction on the larger frames when they aren’t
accompanied by a smaller frame — but the tradeoff is there.  Any bits
you dedicate to redundancy for the sake of noisier receivers are in
some sense not available for increasing the resolution for quieter
receivers.

This may not be a fatal flaw, though, because the usual system doesn’t
serve those quieter receivers that well either — the wide SNR margin
they enjoy is being completely wasted.  This system could provide them
with an even higher-resolution and possibly higher-frame-rate signal
encoded with even less redundancy, with the consequence that those
receivers get better service, too.

So it’s only a narrow range of SNRs, those just above the threshold of
the usual system, where the usual system is superior.  From perhaps 0
to 6 dB or 9 dB above completely failing to work, the usual system is
an improvement.  But anywhere below that, this multirate system
provides degraded service instead of no service, and anywhere above
that, this multirate system provides enhanced service instead of
baseline service.

Apparently one scheme for degradable modulation like this is called
“hierarchical modulation”, and “scalable video coding” is the name for
the H.264 feature that implements another aspect of the above.
