For the “cloak of invisibility” using optical metamaterials, you don’t
actually need a negative refractive index; you just need to be able to
precisely grade the refractive index throughout space.  The approach
they’re taking is to fabricate nanostructures made of resonant
components, but this has high dispersion, and so the invisibility
fades as you use multiple wavelengths.

As an alternative, you could vary the mix of materials going into a
block of glass.  More lead oxide in one part, more silicon and
aluminum oxides in another.  But how can you achieve that?  Depositing
glass powders and then sintering them will leave you with a part
that’s full of voids.  Voids are potentially problematic in structural
parts (e.g. metal mounting brackets) but totally fatal in optics.

If instead of sintering the powders you fully melt them so that
bubbles can rise, the bubbles will mix together the glass that they
float through, and to a lesser extent the glass around it, especially
if you put it under vacuum to degas it like in resin casting.  Also,
if the viscosity is too low, you may get convection currents.

Depositing the glass by FDM in air seems like it would hardly be any
better.

A possible alternative would be to immerse the workpiece being built
in molten lead oxide, using either selective powder deposition or FDM
extrusion to deposit a higher-melting glass “underwater”, thus
avoiding bubbles; the molten lead oxide would fill any voids.  The
lead oxide would immediately begin to “flux” or dissolve the
higher-melting glass, so tight temporal control of the process is
critical.  That same process of dissolution or diffusion can continue
even below the glass transition, but more slowly, and is crucial to
achieving a smooth gradient, but it also limits the strength of the
gradient that can be achieved.  It may be necessary to bake the
finished workpiece in a solid state for some period of time after
completion.

(The lowest-melting glass may not be pure lead oxide, but rather some
mixture; ideally you’d use the lowest-melting glass for the immersion
medium.  Above the glass you could use a soft vacuum)

Speaking of gradients, one way to reduce the variability in such a
process would be to maintain a vertical temperature gradient in the
workpiece being built layer by layer, such that only the surface is
above the point of lead oxide, while the layers below are below the
glass transition temperature.  This won’t prevent diffusion, just slow
it down, but it will stop slumping.

Optical systems built in this way, using gradients rather than
surfaces, can entirely avoid the problems of stray light from unwanted
reflections from the surfaces of lenses, although total internal
reflection is still possible, as in a graded-index optical fiber.

