(Probably far from an original idea.)

I was thinking about texture generation today, and in particular what
you can do in a fragment shader, where deciding which pixels to affect
is not a thing you can do.  This seems like it could be a real
problem, since many real-world textures are the result of a lot of
different objects moving around; for example, the exposed stones in a
sawn concrete surface are in some sense scattered randomly, as are the
leaves on a forest floor.  But in a fragment shader you can’t just
generate some random points and place leaves at them, at least not in
a way that scales when you zoom out.

Random points don’t look random
-------------------------------

I was reminded that when people look at independent identically
distributed random points, they generally think they don’t look very
random, because clusters of points randomly occur, and so the density
of the points varies even at fairly large scales.  Many natural
textures — the stones in the concrete I mentioned before, for example,
but also hairs on the skin, cones on the retina, bubbles in a
foam — break up such clusters by a sort of “relaxation” in which
points move away from one another, evening out the medium-scale
density variations, and eventually the large-scale ones too.

Maybe random-looking points can be a perturbed periodic lattice
---------------------------------------------------------------

But maybe another approach would be to start with a very even dot
distribution and perturb it enough that it looks random.  You could
have some perfectly regular lattice of cells, with a dot at the center
of each — a square or hexagonal lattice — and generate a
two-dimensional value of Perlin noise by which to perturb the dot at
that center.  As long as the dot doesn’t overlap the next cell, the
algorithm to determine the color of a pixel is very simple; if z is
the pixel coordinate:

    c = round(z)
    fragColor = hypot(c + r1 * noise2d(c) - z) > r2 ? bg : fg

If we expand r2 or especially r1 to the point that the dots start to
wander into adjacent cells, that simple seven-instruction algorithm
starts to fail; if we run it for all the adjacent cells, though — 5,
7, or 9 of them, depending on how many candidates there are — we can
determine which of the neighboring cells’ dots are overlapping us, at
the cost of a work multiplier of 5, 7, or 9.

Maybe you can build a fake Voronoi diagram this way
---------------------------------------------------

In the same way, you can draw an almost-Voronoi diagram by having no
dot-radius threshold, just coloring the pixel according to which dot’s
center it’s closest to.  This will occasionally depart from the real
Voronoi diagram because long, sharp projections will occasionally be
truncated early by cell boundaries; perturbing the cell boundaries
slightly with more noise may be a good way to keep that subtle.

How to draw granite
-------------------

Well, what’s granite?  Granite consists of a lot of crystals of
minerals of different colors which grew as the magma cooled, each one
nucleating with some random position and orientation and growing
around that center, faster along some planes of their crystal
structure than along others.  At first only zircon and calcium-rich
plagioclases can crystallize (or forsterite, but it doesn’t occur much
in granite), but as the temperature drops, other minerals like
pyroxenes, more sodic plagioclases, micas, and eventually even quartz
can crystallize.  As the crystals grow, they deplete the local magma
of their own mineral, which means that when the leftover magma
eventually does crystallize, it will be of a different color.

This is precisely the kind of prolonged multivariate field dynamical
process that’s hard to simulate in a fragment shader†, but perhaps we
can generate a similar-looking result by perturbing the Voronoi
distances according to a random skew matrix.  That is, before
computing the magnitude of the displacement from the pixel to a dot
center, multiply that displacement vector through a skew matrix
particular to that dot (generated from yet another call to noise).
This should make the “crystal” tend to be longer in some
apparently-random directions, and shorter in others.  If the skew
matrix also has a random determinant, some “crystals” will be larger
and others smaller.

This is a terribly goofy way to generate this image, though, as you
can solve precisely where the grain boundaries are going to be.  You
don’t really need to do all this computering for every pixel.

† Could be harder — at least crystallizing magma isn’t turbulent.
