Some years ago I thought I had found a way to build electrical logic
gates through magnetoresistance using 19th-century materials science.
The phenomenon in question is the altered resistance of ferromagnetic
materials when magnetized, by about 5% depending on the orientation of
the field, as demonstrated by Kelvin in 1856.  I concluded that, by
using a Wheatstone bridge, you could get large amplification and
inversion from this effect.  What I didn’t realize at the time was
that, as my calculations later showed, the extremely high
self-inductance of the ferromagnetic conductors would limit it to
sub-hertz speeds.

A Hall-effect alternative might solve the problem.  The Hall effect,
demonstrated by Edwin Hall in 1879 in gold leaf, produces a few
millivolts of voltage from one side to the other of a conducting
ribbon with a magnetic field at right angles to it.  The voltage is
proportional to the current through the ribbon and the magnetic field
and inversely proportional to the thickness of the ribbon and the
charge carrier density.

The energy of whatever current is driven by the Hall-effect voltage,
importantly, does not come from the applied magnetic field; it comes
from the sensing current, which does not diminish that field.  In
theory, this means that you could use that voltage to drive another
coil controlling another set of Hall-effect ribbons.  In the absence
of better means of amplification, you could drive the sensing current
through many parallel layers of gold leaf with insulators between them
from many isolated voltage sources, such as separate windings of a
transformer, and put their Hall voltages in series, thus controlling
an arbitrarily large amount of energy with an arbitrarily small
magnetic field.  This series Hall voltage could then drive a load
whose resistance was not too high compared to the (ordinary, not Hall)
resistance of the sensing ribbons.  (Although, wait, aren’t those
sensing ribbons in series?  Is that in fact a limit on the
amplification you can achieve without superconducting ribbons?)

Such a device could, in theory, operate even at high frequencies.  In
practice, though, I think it might require an unreasonably large
amount of apparatus for even a single logic gate.
