Using a hammer-and-chisel approach should enable new kinds of
lightweight, portable, but slow CNC machine tools, by way of
eliminating toolhead side forces during positioning.

One of the greatest challenges in precision machining is toolhead side
forces.  A 3-D printer can get by with a low-rigidity frame, open-loop
control with stepper motors, and triangular-thread (V-thread)
leadscrews in large part because the forces at its toolhead are so
small.  But cutting metal with edged tools or abrasives, even very
sharp edged tools, produces substantial side forces, and these forces
change rapidly and even unpredictably as contact is established or
contact angles change.  Consequently, precision machining invariably
uses closed-loop control and massive structural members to achieve the
desired stiffness, and usually also uses ballscrews or acme-thread
leadscrews.

I’ve speculated previously that it with sufficiently rapid control
systems, it will be possible to provide such stiffness “virtually”, by
countering a detected displacement with a larger opposing displacement
in some actuator, effectively multiplying the rigidity of the frame by
the ratio of displacements.  But here I want to discuss a different
approach, that of hammering.

A hammer or karate chop is a kind of simple machine: you apply a small
force to the hammer over a large distance, and the hammer applies a
large force to the work over a proportionally small distance.  (Stevin
and Galileo did not include the hammer in their list of simple
machines, as they lacked, I think, the concept of kinetic energy.)
Sufficiently rapid and precise feedback about the hammer’s path allows
you to control the point of impact precisely with low energy, but an
alternative mechanism is the hammer-and-chisel mechanism used by an
automatic center punch; this allows you to position the chisel as
slowly and precisely as you like, then transmitting a hammer strike
anywhere on the chisel head precisely to the chisel tip.

The hammer-and-chisel mechanism has been used for this purpose since
the Paleolithic, when it enabled soft, squishy human hands to
precisely shape rocks harder than steel.

At one point I was pretty skeptical of hammering on things to
precisely shape or fix them, since there’s inevitably a shock produced
at the time of impact, and that shock can damage things as it
propagates through the rest of the structure.  But eventually I
learned that hammering is, in many cases, safer and more precise than
applying a large force more slowly through an elastic frame; applying
a force F through a mechanism with stiffness k requires building up an
energy ½F²/k.  If the resistance diminishes once initial resistance is
overcome, as in solid friction and many kinds of material fracture,
this energy is released all at once in an uncontrolled fashion.  By
contrast, a hammer blow can have an arbitrarily small energy, and the
energy *at a given force* is limited only by the stiffness of the
chisel and hammer head themselves, which can be made orders of
magnitude smaller than the stiffness of an entire frame.

This very feature is one of the reasons for the use of automatic
center punches: their hammer energy is the same on every stroke, so
every divot has fairly precisely the same depth.

You could imagine a CNC machine that precisely repositioned a chisel
several times a second under very low toolhead forces, striking the
chisel with a hammer separately moved with higher, but still fairly
low, forces, in order to cut or form a piece of material by applying a
precisely controlled amount of energy with a very large force at a
precisely controlled location.  Wood chisels have been
used with this technique by carpenters to make precise cuts in wood
since the paleolithic.

As the hammer approaches the chisel, it must of course be held in some
kind of mechanism to apply force to it, which means that it needs some
non-negligible stiffness to the chisel and workpiece.  However, at the
point that it actually strikes the chisel, it is not necessary for it
to be held with any stiffness in the axis in which it strikes the
chisel.  It could, for example, be sliding down a tube under its own
momentum, or held with a negative-stiffness cancelation mechanism like
that used to isolate the LIGO from vibration.  Such an expedient could
prevent the shock of impact from being transmitted back into the
struture holding the hammer, which would introduce a vibrational impulse
into the machine frame.

For metal cutting, it probably is not possible to reach the optimal
cutting speed with this approach; recall, as cutting speeds go up, up
to a point, tool life goes up too, because the machine is cutting hot
metal which applies less force to the cutting edge, wearing it less.
(I think it also is more efective at producing a built-up edge, which
worsens cutting precision but decreases wear.)  So we should expect
that cutting tools used in this way will not last as long as cutting
tools used in the traditional cutting mode on a lathe with continuous
movement.  Milling-machine cutting points (whether inserts or just
flute edges) are typically used in a similar discontinuous-cutting
mode, but the metal of the workpiece does not have time to cool
completely between strokes.
