[From a comment on the orange
website.](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21573694)

[Solar furnaces](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_furnace) have been
useful for reaching especially high temperatures since at least
Trombe's 1949 furnace, which can hit 3500°, without computer vision or
even closed-loop control.  So why is a 1500° solar furnace being
touted as a groundbreaking innovation and a new high-temperature
landmark?

A friend asked me what I thought about this earlier, based on [a
somewhat better reprinting of their press release](https://www.geekwire.com/2019/company-backed-bill-gates-claims-breakthrough-concentrated-solar-energy-promising-replace-fossil-fuels-industrial-plants/).

Scroll back to 2010, when Bill Gross started working on this.  That's
when he got funded by that dude whose futurism book about the
Information Superhighway, *The Road Ahead*, didn't mention *the
internet*.  In 1995.  In 2010, photovoltaic modules cost €1.62 per
watt. Concentrating solar power was a promising alternative; it uses
the same steam engines used by coal and nuclear power plants, so at
scale it should be just as cheap as they are, as long as you can get
the cost of the heliostats under control somehow and scale up.  It
also didn't have that pesky intermittency problem PV modules have: you
can store the heat overnight.

Since then, though, heat engines have become economically
uncompetitive relative to PV, because PV modules now cost €0.19 per
watt, where they've been stuck all year.  And steam turbines, almost a
century and a half old, aren't improving or getting cheaper rapidly
the way PV has been.  Being just as cheap as coal isn't a blessing
anymore; it's a handicap.

So, if you've been working on CSP and filing patents for a decade
before getting your pilot plant up and running, a decade during which
the PV market has left your product's price in the dust, what do you
do?  You look for a possible use where CSP is still viable, such as
process heat; you hire a good PR firm; you announce that you won't be
building any plants, but you're "willing to partner with" companies
that want to build your design; and you hope to God nobody says
"Solyndra".

But what's the actual invention?  It seems like the actual news is
that Bill Gross has patented some aspect of his closed-loop control
system using webcams and GPU-accelerated CV to figure out where the
mirrors are pointing to improve your concentration factor.  The key
improvement that made it possible was better GPUs, according to the
press release, anyway.

So what happened, from the point of view of anyone outside Idealab, is
that now Idealab and Intellectual Ventures will sue you if you do this
fairly obvious thing of using high-resolution webcams for precise
heliostat control.

So, when would this be a sensible thing to do?

Trombe's solar furnace and similar devices are able to compete quite
effectively in the "market" for process heat at the 2500–3500° level,
since, as I said, 1949.  (I guess Bill's PR firm didn't know this, or
hopes you don't.)  That's a level almost impossible to achieve using
fire (oxy-acetylene burns at 3500° under ideal conditions), and
difficult even with arc furnaces.  But Bill's thing is designed for a
more prosaic 1000–1500° level, where it's competing not only with fire
but also Kanthal or SiC fed from PV, wind, hydro, and nukes, as well
as induction, dielectric heating, and microwave heating.

The potential advantage of CSP for process heat at these lower
temperatures is that it's cheap and abundant.  If you fill a field
with mirrors, they can harvest 6× as much power than PV modules
covering the same field can.  But if land area is your limiting
factor, your cement plant or steel mill or whatever probably isn't in
the middle of a big field; it's using a lot more energy than your land
receives in sunlight.  In that case, you probably want to pull your
power from someplace further off, whether in the form of coal, oil,
gas, biomass, or electricity.  Probably electricity from PV panels if
we're talking about anything post-2030.

But suppose you *can* put your factory in the field where the mirrors
are, and the limiting resource isn't land but money.  In that case, it
might be a reasonable approach.  PV modules cost €30 a square meter
now. That's probably more expensive than mirrors, if you take into
account that mirrors give you 6x as much energy: €180 per square meter
is the price mirrors have to beat, and that seems doable.

But now you are on notice: if you do that, make sure it's in a country
where Intellectual Ventures's shell companies haven't gotten a patent
on it, or you have to deal with patent trolls.  The press release
reprinted above is clear: as with IV's laser mosquito swatter, they
aren't going to make it happen themselves, but they'll definitely
"partner with" you if you try.

I think we're about to see a giant boom in shitty "do well-known thing
X, but with computer vision" patents similar to the shitty "do
well-known thing X, but on a computer/on the internet" patents that
plagued us in the early 2000s.  The availability of massive GPU power
means that many things that used to be impractical to do with video
data have become possible.
