The distinction between insulators and semiconductors is
temperature-dependent; an insulator becomes a semiconductor when the
thermal energy of its electrons is enough to permit a significant
number of its electrons to transition from its valence band to its
conduction band, continuously replacing those that fall back down.
Even if the bandgap doesn't decrease with temperature, as they
generally do, this means that any insulating material will eventually
become a semiconductor at a high enough temperature.

There is a lot of work on "wide-bandgap high-temperature
semiconductors" like gallium nitride and silicon carbide with
applications up to 300°.  But I think we can think bigger: what about
semiconductors at 900° or 1200°?  The Stefan-Boltzmann law gives us
power dissipation proportional to T<sup>4</supp>; if at 100° we can
dissipate 1 W/cm², then at 700° we should be able to dissipate 16
W/cm², and at 1200°, some 243 W/cm².  This should permit substantially
higher computational speeds, even despite other temperature-driven
phenomena that will slow down computation.

What materials barely begin to conduct electricity at such
temperatures?  Quartz, of course, but perhaps also other refractory
materials like lime, beryllia, thoria, urania, and magnesia.  Other
conduction phenomena also come into play at these temperatures, like
zirconia's conduction by mobile oxygen ions.

Building devices that operate successfully at such temperatures will
be challenging, among other things because they would probably be
destroyed if ever allowed to cool to room temperature, and because the
lifespans of structures even in fairly stable materials is human-scale
at high temperatures.  As discussed in file `gardening-machines`,
though, automated fabrication should reduce the importance of such
durability considerations considerably.

Another difficulty is that you probably still benefit *something* to
use as an insulator in your circuits, although room-temperature
gallium arsenide integrated circuits seem to mostly do okay just using
reverse-biased diode junctions.