Aside from uses in things like rescuing rare books from water damage,
reducing the water content of hygroscopic plastics prior to molding,
and reducing the water content of natural gas to discourage clathrate
formation, dehumidifiers and desiccators are potentially useful human
household items — indeed, in raw vegan circles food dehydrators are
already ubiquitous, as low-temperature dehydration is a crucial
preparation step in many raw vegan dishes.  In developed countries,
clothes dryers are also ubiquitous, to the point that hanging laundry
to dry is prohibited in some neighborhoods, and of course a hair dryer
is precisely a personal keratin desiccator.

Perhaps a more general desiccation appliance would be useful.

Household applications for desiccation include the following:

- Human food, as mentioned above, both for preservation and to enhance
  flavor and alter texture.  This has limitations on the temperature
  it can tolerate — raw vegans normally use a temperature limit of
  40.5°, but different foods have different optimal ranges.
- Garbage — human food waste is commonly 80% to 95% water by weight.
  So the food waste stream can be reduced by a factor of 5 to 20 by
  desiccation.  Desiccation also stops the food waste from decaying
  before further handling.  Furthermore, aerobic composting requires a
  humidity level within a certain optimal range, a range food waste
  normally exceeds.  Incineration suffers even more from excess water
  than composting does.  The usual solution to this problem is to add
  additional dry matter to the compost, but probably a better solution
  is to remove the excess water.  At Burning Man, we use a very simple
  solution to this: we hang the garbage outside in net bags, where the
  sun and dry wind desiccate it within hours.
- Poop — much the same set of concerns applies as those described
  above for pre-eating food waste, but the desiccation process is more
  demanding, as the air will pick up shitty odors as well as water,
  and thus needs postprocessing before release into the environment.
- Dishes — drying dishes with a towel is prohibited by many human
  health codes, because the towel can both spread pathogens from one
  dish to another and provide a suitable medium for the proliferation
  of certain airborne pathogens.  Active drying, as performed by
  dishwashers, can solve this problem.
- Laundry — of course a clothes dryer is precisely a desiccator.  The
  modern unvented clothes dryer uses a heat exchanger to condense the
  water and pump it into a holding tank or drain.
- Moisture harvesting — humans typically die some 32 to 64 hours if
  they cannot ingest water, but can survive 1024–4096 hours without
  food.  But they do not need very much water, typically only
  2–4 ℓ/day (50 μℓ/s).  When drinking water supplies are disrupted,
  they could survive much longer with a system that can recycle
  drinking water from breathed air, from evaporated sweat, from
  garbage, and from passing air.
- Cleaning tools such as mops — these are wet when in use, pick up a
  wide variety of micronutrients, are often composed of carbohydrates
  or protein, and can sometimes remain wet for a long time after use.
  This makes them good environments for the growth of microorganisms
  and fungi, which can be pathogenic to humans, smell bad to them, or
  both.
- People after bathing; hair dryers are one example, but an “air
  shower” of high-speed warm wind could eliminate the need for towels
  and the labor of washing them.  This could even be installed in the
  same physical place as the regular shower.
- People after dying: the decomposition of human corpses involves many
  microorganisms that produce smells that humans find very
  disagreeable, and they can even be pathogenic to them.  Also, they
  can host macroscopic organisms, such as flies, which also create
  health hazards for humans.  Desiccated corpses do not have these
  problems.  (In fiction such as _Dune_, they are also an important
  source of drinking water, but this seems unlikely to ever happen on
  Earth.)
- Coolth: evaporating water cools the system by the water’s enthalpy
  of vaporization, and this is an important way to cool human
  habitations in dry places like the Southwestern USA and Iran — and
  of course humans’ voracious appetite for water results from their
  biologically programmed use of water as sweat for the same purposes,
  but in other places the available water and the pre-existing
  humidity of the air limit the possibilities.  Most of the uses
  mentioned above for a desiccator could additionally be taken
  advantage of to produce a lower-than-ambient temperature.
- Making aerogel, which requires supercritical drying to prevent the
  hydrogel to a xerogel.

These uses seem like they might require multiple different desiccation
appliances.  Poop will probably contaminate the poop desiccator in
such a way as to make it unsuitable for desiccating laundry, dishes,
food, and possibly even food waste.  Poop, human corpses, and food
waste should probably be shredded before desiccation in order to speed
the process; this is never desirable for living people, mops, laundry,
or dishes, and only sometimes desirable for food.  Vacuum, as
discussed below, may be a useful way to speed up desiccation for some
things, but it is fatal to living humans within seconds, and thus its
routine use after bathing could be counterproductive.

However, it seems like a general-purpose desiccation appliance could
perhaps serve a substantial range of uses.

Physically, evaporation is a complex thermodynamic process, but the
main determinants are temperature, airflow rate and turbulence, air
humidity, and air pressure.  Higher temperature, faster and more
turbulent airflow, drier air, and lower pressure all speed up
evaporation.  The interaction among these factors is complex.  The
usual simplified model is that a thin boundary layer of air next to
the moist thing is 100% saturated with humidity, and the air above
that has a linear humidity gradient down from 100% down to the ambient
humidity, driven by diffusion and advection.  But the thickness of the
saturated boundary layer also varies with airflow.

The exponential rise of water’s vapor pressure with temperature means
that even a small temperature difference can make a big difference in
the air’s moisture capacity, and the amount of water that can
evaporate is driven by the difference between the air’s moisture
capacity and its pre-existing moisture content.

I don’t have a good handle on the energy costs of using these
different factors to accelerate desiccation.

Oven desiccation experience
---------------------------

I’ve been using my apartment’s electric oven over the last few months
to desiccate food waste before discarding.  It has a thermostat, a
timer, and a circulating fan; I set the thermostat for 70° (160
archaic degrees) and the timer to an hour or two.  70° is hot enough
to nearly sterilize foods, while not being hot enough to set common
foods on fire in any reasonable period of time.  The oven has the
major disadvantage that the timer is disabled by power
outages — following a power outage, the oven turns back on with no
timer — so it isn’t safe to leave it unattended.  Commonly I put the
food on a glass plate or a sheet of aluminum foil before starting the
oven, since I can clean or discard those easily if food gets stuck to
them.

Vegetable wastes, even onions, generally smell pleasant during this
procedure, which also reduces them greatly in volume and
perishability.  I try to ensure that they are sliced to a thickness of
10mm or less to accelerate the process.  Animal cadaver bones lose
less mass and smell less pleasant — they smell like cooking meat — but
the smell is far less objectionable than rotting meat, which is what
they would become in the garbage after a couple of days without
pre-desiccation.  Eggshells have no noticeable smell and become
brittle quickly.

I’m currently trying to compost some of the results from this process,
without any desiccated animal remains, but adding my own hair.  It
seems to be working somewhat — at least the compost has a reasonably
earthy odor rather than smelling like rotten fruit, and it had only a
few flies at first, nothing since.  Most of its mass comes from yerba
mate and eggshells.  I suspect that the eggshells, which are made of
calcium carbonate rather than calcium phosphate like bones, provide a
pretty robust carbonate buffer against acidification, but I haven’t
actually measured the pH of the compost.

In any case, desiccating food waste before composting it allows you to
delay composting until you’re ready, which can be valuable when you’re
getting a compost heap started and makes it easy to avoid anaerobic
conditions in the compost.

Presumably, oily food could trap water inside a layer of oil, once
water was removed from the outer layers of the food.  I’m not sure
I’ve observed this; even meat bones seem pretty dry if you crack them
open after this process.  Maybe it doesn’t happen; maybe water
molecules can diffuse through the oily layer anyway, or maybe water
has lower surface tension at higher temperatures and so it doesn’t
push and pull the oil into a coherent layer, or maybe the water
doesn’t have sufficiently coherent surface tension when it’s just
occupying the pores of the foodstuff.

For a while, I was using a generic tupperware lid as a plate, since it
was even easier to clean than glass plates.  After lasting through
dozens of cycles, one day half of it melted down onto the plate on the
wire rack below it.  The melted and resolidified plastic was stiff and
brittle; the unmelted part remained flexible, resilient, and ductile,
despite otherwise being similar in appearance.  I’m not sure what
happened; three possibilities occurred to me:

1. Maybe this time the oven got hotter than on previous occasions, but
   only part of it — the circulating fan was not as effective as
   usual.  So the hotter part of the lid melted and degraded, perhaps
   through hydrolysis from moisture absorbed into the plastic.  In
   this possibility, different levels of heat on this one occasion
   caused one part of the plastic to both melt and chemically degrade.

2. Part of the lid had come under chemical attack from some food I’d
   placed on it, either at that moment or in the past; perhaps it
   absorbed some oil, plasticizing it further and lowering its melting
   point.  Oil by itself wouldn’t explain the brittleness, but maybe
   other factors could.  Acid, for example.  In this possibility,
   different levels of chemical degradation in different parts of the
   plastic caused the more degraded part of the plastic to melt.

3. Perhaps the lid had lost plasticizers to evaporation over time in
   the oven.  If this were the case, though, you’d expect the part
   that had lost more plasticizers (and was thus more brittle) to be
   the *last* to melt, not the first.

Regardless, I don’t plan to use plastic trays in a desiccator in the
future without thoroughly qualifying the plastic for handling the
relevant temperatures.
