Granite and similar materials are commonly cut to shape with diamond
saws.  This has a few disadvantages: even abrasive-grade diamonds are
still somewhat expensive, the process produces carcinogenic dust of
crystalline silica, and, with the usual circular-saw blades, the cuts
are necessarily fairly straight and not very precise.

Granite, as I understand it, gets most of its strength from the
interlocking quartz crystals that make up a significant part of its
bulk.  Other major constituents such as feldspar and mica are mostly
much softer and less chemically inert, so they are easier to cut.
(Zircon is an exception, but it typically constitutes only a small
part of granite.)

Quartz can be converted to water-soluble sodium silicate waterglass
with an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide heated a bit above room
temperature, ideally to 100 degrees.  So a plausible approach to these
problems is to cut preheated granite with a wire saw flood-lubricated
with hot lye.  For the wire, you’d need a metal that was adequately
stable in the strongly reducing, warm, wet, and alkaline conditions
we’re talking about; I think ordinary steel wire would work fine, but
if not, surely some kind of brass or bronze would be adequate, in an
argon chamber if all else fails.  Using a wire made of a hardened tool
steel would increase the risk of wire cracking but reduce the abrasive
wear on the wire.  Some saw-tooth-like surface treatment (perhaps a
helical ridge) might be effective at increasing swarf clearance and
concentrating abrasive wear on a non-structural part of the wire.

The side forces on the “sawing” wire would be much smaller than the
forces on a diamond saw or even an abrasive-sawing wire, and it could
cut paths through the stone with tight curves and corners, enabling
the fabrication of a much wider array of shapes than a circular saw
can, perhaps at higher precision, and certainly with much smaller side
forces on the machine guiding it.

This approach could also work for cutting other troublesome materials
that are vulnerable to lye, in particular including glasses such as
soda-lime glass and borosilicate, but also some other silicate
minerals and metal sulfides.
