You can shape ice with streams of hot air for rapid, inexpensive
fabrication.

Water is one of the cheapest materials available, and it freezes and
melts at a temperature that’s extremely convenient for shaping,
although it has its drawbacks for structural use.  But it should be
possible to use a form made of water ice to give shape to a mold made
of some other material that can harden below 0°, or to make an
easily-removable mold for such a material.

Ice has the advantage that, because it’s used over such a narrow
temperature range, it has excellent dimensional stability.

Ice is fairly fragile (about 1 MPa tensile strength, which depends
greatly on strain rate and very little on temperature), so precisely
stamping things with it is pretty much out of the question; to
transfer its shape to something else, that other thing pretty much
needs to be liquid.  By the same token, though, it’s very easy to cut,
leading to the ice sculpture competitions in various places every
winter, as well as table centerpieces at many corporate events.  Other
possible ways to shape ice include additive manufacturing (by adding
water just above freezing to a below-freezing workpiece) and carving
it with high-speed streams of hot air.

For additive manufacturing, it probably would help a lot to include
some impurities in the water that increase viscosity and perhaps make
the water thixotropic, so that it stays put on the workpiece from the
time it comes out of the nozzle until the time it freezes, but without
lowering its freezing point too much or promoting large ice crystals.
Possibilities that occur to me include tiny air bubbles, gelatin,
alginate, agar-agar, carrageenan, konnyaku, gum arabic, xanthan gum,
and grease (oil with surfactant), possibly with acids or bases to
promote gel formation.

There are a few different hardening processes that could harden the
secondary material.

First, obviously, there’s freezing, where the liquid cools down below
its freezing point and becomes a solid.  This has the disadvantage
that it releases a large amount of heat, which can melt the surface of
the ice, although this is a less serious problem with
low-crystallinity materials such as Dairy Queen dip-cone
chocolate-flavored paraffin wax.  And maybe, since it will happen
first at the surface of contact, it won’t cause any loss of detail.
Hot-beeswax casting has long been used to “record the shapes of
delicate ice accretions on aircraft components”, according to Reehorst
and Richter in 1987.

Second, there’s the hydration-driven recrystallization of plaster of
Paris.  This happens more slowly at 0°, but I’m pretty sure it still
happens.  It also has the disadvantage that it releases a lot of heat.

Third, there’s polymerization, which is what Reehorst and Richter
reported good results with, starting with thinned silicone rubber
resin at -5° and recooled after degassing.  Many silicones will not
cure at these low temperatures; Reehorst and Richter found that Dow
Corning 3110 or 3112 with “catalyst 4” worked well, and Dow Corning HS
RTV worked best (10 parts base to 1 catalyst with 1 wt%
20-cSt-viscosity DC 200 silicone thinner).  Smooth-On Corporation
sells a silicone molding compound recommended by Freeze Cast
Engineering for this purpose.