So I was just thinking about how my city is annoyingly polluted.  In
the absence of successful collective action to reduce the sulfur
content of diesel fuels, and to require proper maintenance of motors,
it seems like it would be possible at least to handle the problem at a
more local level.  Like a per-apartment level.

You could seal up your apartment or house, but that has a couple of
different problems.  The biggest one is that when the amount of CO₂ in
the air rises to about 1% you will start to feel that it’s a bit hard
to breathe, and when it reaches 10%, you will die — even though there
is still plenty of oxygen left (barring a Biosphere-II-type surprise).

So this kind of thing is a problem that has been dealt with in a lot
of different contexts over the years, including scuba diving, nuclear
submarines, the Space Shuttle, the ISS, firefighting, mine rescue, and
carbon capture for power-plant flue gas.

The scuba-diving approach, which is also sometimes used in submarines,
is to pass the gas over a base that reacts with the CO₂; they use
hydroxides of calcium, magnesium, sodium, and lithium, which transform
from hydroxides into carbonates.  The trouble with these is that you
have to keep replacing the hydroxide, which is kind of undesirable.
You can buy calcium hydroxide at the hardware store here for use as
paint (whitewash), for about US$3 per kilogram, although it’s mixed
with an unspecified quantity of calcium carbonate, and some other
random shit.  A kilo of CaOH sucks up about 1.2 kilos of carbon
dioxide.  So you’d be using about five kilos a week.

On the plus side, it’s super low tech.  You can just paint it on the
wall and let it suck up the CO₂ from there over the next few days.
It’ll also suck it up just sitting in the bucket, but that will take
many years.  (Which suggests that you could buy, say, ten tons of it
and just let it sit in a crate.)

You can regenerate calcium carbonate back into calcium hydroxide by
roasting it, but you have to get it up to 850° or so, which is pretty
hot.  Magnesium carbonate is more promising: it starts to decompose
back into magnesium oxide at just 350°, and if you don’t heat it past
700° or so, it remains deeply eager to suck the CO₂ back out of your
air.  So you could imagine some kind of solar kiln on your roof to
bake out the carbon dioxide you’d exhaled over the last day or two.
But you’re still having to deal with powders, which probably means
batch rather than continuous-flow.  And they’re caustic powders, so if
you trip carrying a bucket of this shit, you’re going to the hospital.
(Magnesium oxide gets a lot more stable if you heat it further,
apparently.)

(The ISS uses a similar system, but uses zeolite molecular sieves
rather than alkali.)

The US nuclear submarine fleet chose a different option, one used for
flue-gas treatment: they use an aqueous solution of ethanolamine.
Ethanolamine, like magnesium hydroxide or calcium hydroxide, is eager
to suck up CO₂ from your air; unlike them, it does so while remaining
happily liquid in an aqueous solution, so you can pump it around.
Even better, you can persuade it to give up the CO₂ by heating it to
merely 120° or so, which is a much easier thing to do.  On the
downside, it’s inflammable and toxic.  Its cousin diethanolamine works
too, and is much less inflammable and toxic.  Also on the downside, to
get it to absorb the CO₂, you need to compress the gas to several
atmospheres, at least 5 but ideally more like 200 atmospheres.

But that seems like the kind of thing you could reasonably have in
your house.  I mean, your refrigerator is already compressing its
R-134a refrigerant to about ten atmospheres, which I think is enough
to persuade diethanolamine to take up the CO₂.  So you could very
reasonably install an “air conditioner” with a similar-size compressor
motor, compressing air.  (You might be able to allow the air to
re-expand to atmospheric pressure through a series of turbines
alternating with heat exchangers in order to offset some of the energy
use of the compressor.)  It would need to pump through about 100 m³ of
air per day per person in order to suck up 1kg of CO₂ per day at a 1%
concentration.  That’s a bit more than a liter per second, or 115mℓ
per second at the cooled compression output.

I don’t know how much the liquid flow needs to be.  Presumably several
milliliters per second.  Most of the temperature difference in the
liquid can be managed with a countercurrent heat exchanger, so that it
doesn’t represent an ongoing energy waste, in particular the part
where the hot liquid coming back into your house has to shed heat into
your space to get back down to room temperature.

We can estimate the energy usage of this contraption.  Isothermically
compressing 1.15ℓ down to 115mℓ involves squeezing, say, 9cm out of a
10cm cylinder with 115cm² surface area, against a pressure that rises
linearly from 0 to 10 bar; that’s 518J, so the compressor needs 518W.
Some of this (let’s say 90%) can in theory be provided by
decompressing the sweetened air through turbines, so you might need
52W.  And if you’re heating up, say, 10mℓ of something water-like from
40° to 120° each second, that’s 80 cal/s, or 330 W, of which you can
probably economize 90% with a countercurrent heat exchanger, getting
you down to 33 W.  And you probably need another 10 W or so for the
water pump.  Total, about 95W dissipated, out of 950W flowing hither
and thither.

Now, of this 95W, some fraction is presumably the actual unavoidable
Carnot loss from pumping CO₂ from a (potentially) low-CO₂ environment
to a (potentially) high-CO₂ environment (although in fact we’re
proposing here to pump it from your 10000ppm CO₂ sealed neurotic
bunker to the 400ppm outside world).  But that is probably a small
amount compared to the 10% losses I’ve assumed in
compressing-decompressing and heating-cooling cycles.

(We could apply this same approach to removing CO₂ from the air at
scale.  Note, however, that this 95W is about the same wattage as the
human being that hypothetically exhaled that kilogram per day of CO₂,
so you end up using about the same energy to get the CO₂ out of the
air with this approach that you originally got out of burning it — and
that’s after the CO₂ has reached 10 000 ppm!  So, while this is a
viable approach to carbon dioxide removal in a world where we have a
great deal more energy available than we ever used in fossil fuels, it
is too expensive at the moment.)

You may be able to use photosynthesis, as in Biosphere II, to remove
some of the CO₂ from the atmosphere.  However, this will require
significant indoor acreage; at normal CO₂ concentrations, you need
about as much sunlight to turn your CO₂ back into carbohydrates as it
took to turn it into the carbohydrates you ate.  Beema bamboo, a
thick-walled variety, supposedly produces 50 tons of dry biomass per
acre per year (112 tonnes/ha/y), yielding 4000 kcal/kg.  That’s about
6.6 W/m², which means that your 100-watt body would need 15m² of
bamboo to consume the CO₂ it emits.  Other high-yielding plants are
similar — sugarcane commercially reaches 70 dry tonnes per hectare per
year and experimentally has reached 98 dry tonnes/ha/y, which is
5.2 W/m².  (Hardier plants like switchgrass and Miscanthus, which
thrive without the subtropical conditions that beema and sugarcane
demand, are down around 15 to 40 dry tonnes/ha/y).

Most crops, apparently, increase production substantially (varying
from 25% to 200%) CO₂-supplemented in a greenhouse, but I don’t know
if this applies to super-high-biomass-productivity crops like Beema
bamboo and sugarcane.  1000 ppm is a common supplementation level.
10 000 ppm is high enough that it will likely cause problems for
plants; [Alberta’s official advice to greenhouse gardeners][0] is to
keep below 4500 ppm for the sake of plants, or 5000 ppm for the sake
of humans; other sources suggest that over 1200ppm some crops start to
“show undesirable growth responses”.  You’d only reach that level if
the plants fall behind your breathing, and since the curve levels off
then, at that point the overall system could go unstable — you’d want
to keep the concentration in the range where the plants can increase
their photosynthesis to respond to elevated CO₂ levels.

[0]: http://www1.agric.gov.ab.ca/$department/deptdocs.nsf/all/opp2902

One great difficulty with this approach, however, is that if you bring
15m² or 30m² of sunlight into your house to grow plants, you need to
have a way to shed the kilowatts of heat you’re adding — roughly two
orders of magnitude more than those dissipated by the diethanolamine
system, which hopefully you can also manage to dissipate outside the
house, at least in the summer. 

(You may in fact be able to get by with 15m² of *sunlight*
concentrated onto a significantly smaller area of *plants*.)

One approach to solving this problem is to keep the plants in a
separately-insulated greenhouse, which can exchange air with your
dwelling space via a heat exchanger.  If you were to follow Alberta’s
recomendations, you could perhaps send air to the greenhouse at
4000 ppm CO₂ and get it back at 1000 ppm, thus dropping 3000 ppm; the
1kg/day/person mentioned above then is about 4 liters per second or
8 cfm.  You can get 10 cfm out of a 75mm-diameter 4-watt 3000 RPM fan
that you might mount on your computer’s CPU.  Another benefit of
keeping the greenhouse at a different temperature is that
CO₂-supplemented plants may prefer [higher temperatures, like 35°][1],
which is very uncomfortable for people; but you could keep it at those
higher temperatures without bothering yourself.

[1]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1067045/pdf/plntphys00578-0152.pdf

If we figure that a city block is normally 100m×100m, and (to play it
safe) that we need 30m² of sunlight to fix a person’s CO₂, a city
block can house some 330 people.

Once we’ve taken care of the CO₂, there are other things in the air we
need to take care of.  A variety of artificial objects outgas
pollutants like formaldehyde; in the absence of ventilation to vent
these to the outside world, they could accumulate to potentially
dangerous levels.  One approach is to work hard not to allow things
into your house that are likely to outgas pollutants, but that’s very
difficult.

The approach taken in the ISS is to have a separate [trace contaminant
control system][2], which is just an activated-carbon air filter.  The
Mir space station thermally regenerated its activated carbon with a
hot non-oxidizing gas; the ISS uses disposable activated carbon
instead, plus an 0.5%-palladium-on-alumina catalytic converter to burn
up methane and other things that get past the activated carbon,
followed by LiOH sweetening.

[2]: https://archive.org/details/nasa_techdoc_19980058812

Their activated carbon is impregnated with phosphoric acid in order to
soak up ammonia off-gassed by human metabolic processes.

See also file `air-filter`.