As mentioned briefly in file `tub-heating`, intermittent fluid flow
can transport heat better than continuous fluid flow with the same
average speed.  The case there is that heating my apartment with the
shared hot-water heater would require 19 mℓ/s, but drawing that
continuously would just heat up the pipes in the wall, not the
apartment.  If, instead, I draw 300 mℓ/s for two minutes, I can put 36
liters of hot water into a bucket or radiator, which can then release
the heat into the apartment over the next half hour.  This eliminates
more than 85% of the heat loss — although the half-liter or so of
water left in the pipe for that half hour will lose nearly all of its
heat, that’s only 3% of the total heat.

This is a general property of heat transport through thin, lossy
tubes: if the amount of time the transport fluid spends in the lossy
tube is pushed to extremes by using pulsing flow, the overall system
efficiency improves, sometimes dramatically.  I speculate that, in the
mass-transport realm, this might be a reason vertebrate hearts use the
shocking, violent pulsing motion that they do, incurring an obvious
waste of energy from unnecessary viscous energy losses, rather than
the peristaltic motion used by earthworm hearts and insect hearts:
that way, most of the blood can spend more of its time in the
capillaries and less of its time uselessly losing oxygen in large
vessels, and furthermore even the venous part of the non-pulmonary
capillaries gets fully-oxygenated blood, and even the venous part of
the pulmonary capillaries gets fully-deoxygenated blood to oxygenate
and decarbonate.

This has a direct application to ice vest design (see file
`ice-pants`.)  Here you have a substantial amount of coolant (salt
water, say) sitting in tubing inside the vest, absorbing heat from
your body, and a substantial amount of coolant sitting in tubing
inside an ice pack, releasing heat into the melting ice.  If you use a
continuous slow flow, all the coolant passing through the transitional
tubing between these two points is going to lose an unnecessarily
large amount of heat, and additionally, part of the vest will be ice
cold, while another part will barely be cold at all, decreasing heat
transfer; an analogous phenomenon will impede heat transfer within the
ice pack, where the coolant near the exit is already too cold to
release much additional heat.  If, instead, you use periodic sudden
pulses that replace most of the vest coolant at once, the whole vest
will be a spatially uniform (but temporally oscillating) temperature,
increasing heat transfer substantially.

Probably the way to do this electrically is to use a small electric
motor to wind up a spring, then release a brake on the spring to drive
the pump.  This avoids the need for a large electric motor.

I think I hadn’t noticed this previously because of an aesthetic or
philosophical inclination toward symmetrical, steady-state solutions,
which are easier to analyze, rather than oscillatory or asymmetric
solutions: wheels rather than legs, turbines rather than pistons,
linearity rather than nonlinearity, flat rather than curved walls,
continuous rather than crenellated or fractal webs.  I speculate that
this inclination is shared by much of modern science and engineering
and represents a significant blind spot.
