I want a calculator that lets me do instant calculation with low
precision and then do the same calculation to higher precision, and
that is instantly responsive.

I want to be able to mix values that are functions of time with simple
scalars.

One aspect of this is using interval arithmetic or some similar kind
of approximation to ensure that the rendering is responsive and
doesn’t block user input.

Another aspect is that I want to see a time-series dangling from each
non-scalar-valued operator and variable in my expression, although
maybe not all of equal prominence; maybe mouseovers to focus on the
active ones.  And in some cases, I'd like to see it updating in real
time as I'm editing the expression, like if it's a sound signal I'm
generating.

I want the time axis to be vertical, rather than the usual horizontal,
because the expression is traditionally represented horizontally, and
trying to run the time axis horizontally too would mean that you can’t
see much of any variable.

Another is that the RPN aspect of rpn-edit works really well: each
keystroke has an immediate effect, and there are no
unbalanced-parentheses errors.  So I want to stick with that.  If I'm
playing music, I probably want the leftmost top-level value to be the
one that's played by default, rather than the ones I'm building up to
the right.

Another thing, though, is that I want to be able to move back and
forth between continuous and discrete time-series without changing the
formula, and I want to be able to apply the same function to different
input time-series.  This requires some kind of functional abstraction,
at least giving names to things.

For trading analysis, I need more powerful time-series manipulation
than what I’ve implemented so far.  I need to be able to control, and
in particular subset, time.  I need to be able to conform time-series
acquired with different (and irregular) time bases.  I need operations
on selections like “extend ten minutes into the future”.  I need to be
able to apply smoothing filters.