I’ve written a keyboard-driven interactive calculator at
<http://canonical.org/~kragen/sw/dev3/rpn-edit>, but it’s really more
of a prototype than anything else, and using it on a cellphone is
painfully clumsy.  But it’s already pretty useful.

It interprets an RPN program to produce a sequence of formulas and
their corresponding numerical results, displaying both the formulas
and the results; the values can be vectors, and vectors are plotted as
sequences of numbers.

So I’ve been thinking about how to take advantage of multitouch and
small screens, and I’ve come up with some ideas that I think will be
substantially easier than what I have now, even without a keyboard.

One of the problems with the current approach I’m taking is that what
you’re editing is really the RPN representation of the set of
formulas.  This is particularly tricky when you’re rearranging a
formula, because it’s hard to tell if you’re going in the direction
you want; you have to go through a lot of disorienting intermediate
states first.

Another problem is that it’s pretty time-consuming to select existing
sub-terms.  A third is that DAGs aren’t really supported, because the
stack machine doesn’t have variables or operations like DUP, OVER, or
PICK.

So here are a few ideas that are generic to multitouch in general
which I haven’t seen tried much or at all:

1. Quasimode buttons which, while held down with one finger (and
   possibly pushed in some direction), cause touches with the other
   finger to have some unusual effect.  For example, a trashcan button
   which, while held, sends everything you touch into the trash; a
   break-apart button which, while held, splits subnodes out of
   formulas and turns them into formulas themselves at the top level;
   a push-up button which, while held, factors subexpressions out of
   function definitions, copying them into all callers; etc.  In a
   photo manager, you might have a rotate-90° quasimode, or a
   quasimode to apply a given filter.  Quasimode buttons have the
   advantage over pie menus (mentioned later) that you can drag your
   finger around the display until you have the right thing selected,
   taking advantage of visual feedback to allow you to accurately
   select deeply nested subexpressions.  Quasimode buttons should
   visually highlight the objects they are applicable to while they
   are pressed; they can also display a transparent, non-interactible
   message that explains what they do.  And of course some of the
   buttons can be non-displayed at any given time, using scrolling or
   tabs to bring the desired buttons into view.  Foucault et al.’s
   “SPad” prototype uses this approach.  In Surale, Matulic, and
   Vogel’s 2017 paper, it’s called “non-dominant hand” or
   “non-preferred hand”, a term they took from Li et al.’s 2005
   pen-based paper; they found it was the fastest of all
   mode-switching alternatives tested except for two-finger strokes,
   although it had a higher error rate when the user was standing;
   users rated it as the easiest to learn and most accurate when
   sitting, though it suffered somewhat on some other measures.

2. A single primary selection or focus, as with Macintosh-style GUIs,
   which can be set by tapping an object; but unlike Macintosh-style
   GUIs, the selection of an object results in action buttons popping
   out of the sides of other objects for binary operations that
   combine the two objects.  For example, if you have an expression
   “5” sitting around and another expression “[11, 12]” gets selected,
   the “5” should grow buttons for +, -, ÷, ×, ↑, and maybe some other
   things.  Originally I was thinking that you should just use two
   fingers to select two objects, and that might be worth trying, but
   then I realized that in cases like these, most of the time you want
   to select newly created objects to do more things with them, and
   it’s probably easier if that happens automatically without having
   to locate the new object and move your finger to it.

3. Another kind of quasimode that turns the whole area of the display
   into a two-dimensional input for the currently selected item until
   the quasimode button (or perhaps just the drag) is released.  For
   example, this could allow using the whole display to spin through
   enumerated alternatives, rather than the half of the screen that
   iOS Safari uses for `<select>` elements.  This technique applies
   also to the sliders and dials mentioned later.  Some FPS games may
   use this for aiming; Bret Victor’s animation demos use it.

4. To take advantage of multitouch’s higher precision in motion
   direction than initial touch position, like the typical
   lower-left-hand corner movement pad in video games which centers on
   your initial tap, we can use pie menus — while your finger is on an
   object (perhaps with no quasimode active, or perhaps with a special
   menu quasimode active), a pie menu pops up around it to offer
   applicable unary operations.  In the calculator, this is probably
   better for top-level formulas than for subexpressions, because
   selecting a subexpression could be finicky.  The Banovic et
   al. multitouch variation of pie menus uses a second finger to
   select the menu item, which seems like it should work a lot better
   actually, since it’s the distance and angle between the two fingers
   that determines the command.  Gupta & McGuffin’s 2016 pie menu
   paper is similar to the pin-and-cross method mentioned in #10, but
   by using two separate fingers to open the menu (selecting the
   object) and to select the menu items, it has two touchpoints to use
   to control the resulting operation once it’s begun, allowing
   simultaneous rotation, scaling, and translation.  Bitwig Studio’s
   “radial gesture menu” uses motion to select one of a small number
   of “inner ring” menu items or a second finger touch to select items
   from an “outer ring”.

5. Operation previews, providing one step of lookahead: the arithmetic
   operation buttons sticking out of the “5” in the above example
   should show the results — “+ [16, 17]”, “↑ [48828125, 244140625]”,
   “× [55, 60]”, and so on.  Once the operation is selected, a new
   object is created, and it becomes the selected object.  In the
   calculator, though maybe not in other contexts, the objects that
   went into it disappear (you can break it back apart if you want).

6. In addition to the usual keyboard entry of numbers, entering
   univariate functions by drawing graphs of them with your finger is
   a very useful feature.  You probably want some kind of weighted
   average of recent and nearby finger strokes in order to not
   introduce discontinuities unintentionally and in order to allow
   changes that are small compared to your finger positioning
   precision.  For discrete sequences of numbers, lollipop charts may
   be a reasonable alternative.

7. Each object has multiple possible views: in the case of the
   calculator, for example, as a formula, as a sequence of computed
   numeric values, as a graph, and so on.  Some past experimental user
   interfaces have used “lenses” that could be dragged over objects in
   order to provide these different views, but I think that’s probably
   kind of gimmicky and clumsy, except for cases where you actually
   want to scrub a boundary back and forth over small parts of an
   image; it’s better to just display all the views for the currently
   selected object, when there is one, and allow the user to “pin”
   views they want to keep visible.  Video games actually do provide
   multiple views of the same data fairly often, but they usually
   aren’t all interactive.

8. A transparent overlay keyboard.  An overlay keyboard for typing is
   an honest-to-goodness mode, rather than a quasimode, but it’s
   probably necessary on current cellphones due to their small
   screens.  But there’s no reason it has to obscure your view of the
   workspace. (GTA 3 has a slightly transparent keyboard.)  For the
   calculator application, you probably want to be able to enter
   several numbers in a row without stopping.  Given sufficient
   scrollability, the always-visible quasimode buttons could be
   transparent as well, like most buttons and most status displays in
   most 3-D cellphone games, so that they effectively take up less
   screen real estate.

9. Sliders and dials: in addition to entering numbers with the
   keyboard, we want to be able to adjust them interactively with a
   movement, as in Bret Victor’s work.  So two of the views available
   on any number literal are as a linear slider and as a logarithmic
   dial with one decade per rotation, plus a button in the middle for
   negation.  These two views are quasimodal in the sense that while
   you press on them, the entire screen can be used for the
   interaction.  The logarithmic dial in particular allows access to a
   large range of values without having to define the range ahead of
   time.  Making these quasimodal allows us to use multiple strokes
   with the adjusting finger across the display.  On the other hand,
   non-quasimodal sliders would allow us to use several fingers at
   once to control several different quantities.

10. The fidget-spinner-like pin-and-cross interaction technique
    presented by Yuexing Luo and Daniel Vogel is maybe a better
    alternative to pie menus; it preserves the high spatial resolution
    of being able to drag your finger around until you find the right
    thing with the screen real-estate advantages of pie menus.  The
    disadvantage is that (it looks to me like) really only angles
    almost directly to the left and right of the target object are
    really usable, giving you four commands, although they went a bit
    further and used a few different angles on each side, including
    one at 45° above the X-axis which I have to think would be super
    uncomfortable if you were left-handed.  Distinguishing between
    different distances seems like it would multiply the number of
    alternatives.  Gupta & McGuffin’s approach mentioned above might
    allow further degrees of freedom, and could be used one-handed
    within limited angles.

11. Focused-item zooming: the currently-selected item should be
    displayed larger, maybe by an areal factor of 2–4, so that you can
    normally display things at a slightly uncomfortably small size,
    and then make them amply large when they’re selected.  Some games
    do do this.

12. Indirect input, like Pfeuffer et al.’s “gaze-touch” and “gaze
    shifting”, either through a draggable lens (since gaze-tracking on
    cellphones is an unsolved problem), or through something like
    Käser, Agrawala, and Pauly’s 2011 FingerGlass, which defines the
    area of interest using a pair of nearby fingers.  These approaches
    dramatically improve effective display resolution and reduce the
    occlusion problem for drawing and selection precision.

Upon observing some people in the subway using their phones, I came up
with some observations:

* By far the most frequent interaction types were vertical scrolling
  without taking advantage of momentum and typing a letter on the
  onscreen keyboard.  These clustered; it was common to see 20
  interactions in a row of the same type.
* The third most common interaction type was tapping buttons, list
  items, or menu items.
* The fourth most common interaction type was quasimodally recording
  an audio message in WhatsApp.
* Occasionally I saw horizontal scrolling.  Once I saw a double-click
  to zoom.  I saw no photo-taking, drawing, or pinch-zooming.
* Around 95% of the people were using their phones in portrait mode.
* Most people typed using two thumbs on the onscreen keyboard, even
  though the phone was in portrait mode; sometimes they even let go of
  the subway straps while standing to do this.  They just bought
  phones big enough that this was comfortable for their hand size.
  The only person I saw using their phone in landscape mode was
  playing an immersive video game.
* Social interaction through cellphones, such as WhatsApp, Instagram,
  and Fecebutt, was much more popular than solo video gaming, such as
  Candy Crush.

I tentatively conclude that a new interface needs to be operable with
two thumbs in portrait mode and not break single-finger vertical
scrolling in order to be avoid large usability problems.

Some ideas specific to the calculator application
-------------------------------------------------

In a good calculator, there is some way to use a computed value more
than once; the dataflow forms a DAG, not a tree.  In the language of
formulas, we do this with variables.  I think there should be a
quasimode button that allows you to factor out a subexpression into a
variable so you can use it again.  At one point, I thought that
probably it would be best to do this implicitly: if you selected a
subexpression as an operand, then that would pull out the
subexpression into a variable and use it twice.  But then I realized
that it would be more intuitive to use that approach to edit the
existing formula — same interaction, but sucking the standalone
operand into the existing formula, replacing the selected
subexpression with the newly created subexpression.  This is similar
to how function composition worked in early versions of Subtext.

Aside from adding complexity to existing subexpressions, we often want
to simplify them or replace them altogether.  I think simple
replacement is likely to be frequent enough to warrant the use of
drag-and-drop of a formula for it — which, if we make it mean “swap”,
can also function to swap arguments around and rearrange parts of an
expression.  Simplification can be done with the inverse of the
above-mentioned combining operation — a user-interface action that
removes an operator and expels one of its arguments to be an
independent formula.

Given the ability to define variables like x = 2+3×4, a very
incremental way to define functions is to select a subexpression and
convert it into an argument; for example, if the 3, we would transform
the definition into x(y) = 2+y×4, replacing all the existing
references to x with x(3).  This refactoring pulls the argument into
the caller (every caller); if the whole definition of x is selected,
it reduces x to the identity function, and we could as a special case
remove x entirely, thus allowing this single extract-argument
refactoring to also serve as inline-function.

The inverse refactoring is not always possible, since different
arguments may be passed at different locations.

derivatives, integrals

optimization

vertical layout

reduction (?)

different views

12. Temporal univariate function input and output: in addition to a
    static two-dimensional display of a sequence or continuous
    function, we can cycle through the values of the independent
    variable with time, as, for example, we do when it’s an audio
    waveform we're playing back.  But we can use this to choose a
    single numerical value to display at any given time, stepping a
    cursor visibly through the values; for an input variable, if
    augmented with a slider, we can use the slider to “push” the value
    up or down in a given region, or just to set it.
