Guy Blelloch and others wrote a paper in 2012, “Internally
Deterministic Parallel Algorithms Can Be Fast”.

Their basic theory is that fork-join nested parallelism with no
communication between concurrently running threads allows you to
program efficient parallel algorithms relatively easily without
introducing nondeterminism.

Or wait, maybe their threads have “shared state” and consequently
depend on “non-trivial commutative operations”.  If that’s true I
don’t see how the stated properties of the dependency graph can be
correct.  I guess those commutative operations on shared state don’t
enter into the dependency graph except as a set.

So for example they have an AtomicAdd operation to add a value to a
shared variable, but it can’t return a value without violating
internal determinism.

They support four different kinds of memory objects supporting
commuting operations:

- memory cells, supporting the "priority write" operation x.pwrite(v),
  which updates x to have the maximum of its old value and v, and a
  read operation that returns its current value.
- reservables, supporting the operations x.reserve(p), x.check(p), and
  x.checkR(p) check-and-release.  Check and check-and-release commute,
  I think?  Not entirely sure.  checkR sets the priority of the
  reservable back to ⊥ and returns TRUE if it was currently reserved
  with the specified priority.  None of the checks commute with
  reserve(), but I think reserve() commutes with itself.
- dicts, supporting d.insert(x) and d.elements(), which returns an
  element for each key that has been inserted, eliminating duplicate
  keys.  Both reads and writes commute among themselves but not with
  each other.  Elements contain their keys within themselves.  A
  user-specified priority resolves duplicates, and linear probing
  evicts elements with lower-priority keys and moves them further down
  to ensure that the final iteration order is not dependent on
  insertion order.
- disjoint sets, for spanning forests; f.find(x) returns the set
  identifier containing x, and f.link(s, x) merges the sets of s and
  x.  The criteria for commutativity are somewhat tricky.
