I think jello normally has about the refractive index of water, but
it’s possible to change it from about 1.3 to about 1.7 by adding
sugar, or lower it as low as 0.7 by adding alcohol; both will diffuse
through the jello once it is set.  To avoid chromatic diffraction
patterns, the difference in optical path length should be over 10λ, or
about 7μm for red light.  This in turn suggests that a variation in
refractive index from 1.3 to 1.4 would require layers of some 70μm or
more in thickness.  But of course that is easy to achieve; what is
difficult to achieve is layers of *less* than about 100μm.

The proposal, in short, is to deposit jello with a 3-D printer in thin
layers with continuously variable sugar or alcohol content, in order
to approximate a desired optical transformation function.  Other food
gels such as agar, carrageenan, or konjac are also likely to work
well, and have the advantage of avoiding ethical issues with cruelty
to animals.  As the jello is deposited, it will cool and gel, slowing
but not eliminating the diffusion of the dopants.

Discontinuities in refractive index that scatter light in conventional
optical systems, producing stray light that limits optical system
performance.  Dopant diffusion eliminates these discontinuities,
replacing them with gradients, permitting order-of-magnitude
improvements in optical system complexity.

Active closed-loop control of refractive index of deposited material
permits the use of very small differences in refractive index to
improve control of optical phase delay.  Given a layer thickness of
200μm, a minimally acceptable phase delay error of 100nm would seem to
require .05% error in the refractive index of the deposited material,
for example, controlling whether the refractive index is 1.4000 or
1.4007.  This turns out to be feasible with closed-loop control, as
follows.

According to the International Scale of Refractive Indices, water’s
refractive index at 40% sugar is 1.3997; at 41% it is 1.4016, a
difference of 0.0019 units of IOR over 1%.  Ordinary lab
refractometers provide a readout to 5 digits of precision.  So this
level of control amounts to controlling the sugar content of water to
a precision of about 0.3%, or 0.3°Bx, which I think is feasible.
Indeed, it should be feasible to control it to within the precision of
the refractometer, 0.0001 units.  This corresponds to a phase error of
some 20nm, which is acceptable for even the most demanding optics.
Some refractometers have 5× smaller errors than this, which requires
wavelength calibration of their light source and temperature
compensation of the sample.

Such closed-loop process control using process refractometers has long
been common practice in industries that process sugar solutions.

It isn’t necessary to control the IOR of the finished product to this
level of precision in an absolute sense, because what matters for
refraction is the *gradient* of IOR; it’s just necessary to avoid
random errors between passes and layers.  This is fortunate, because
the refractive index of the sugar-water system varies with temperature
by about 0.0001 per kelvin.

It should be possible to achieve fine control of sugar concentration
by mixing two or more homogeneous solutions in varying proportions;
for example, a mixture of 36%-sugar jello A and 42%-sugar jello B that
is 50-50 would be 39% sugar, while if it’s 55-45, it would be 38.7%
sugar.  In this way a 5% error in the mixing process amounts to only
an 0.3% error in the final concentration.

Some other related solute systems have nonmonotonic refractive-index
curves; the ethanol-water system, for example, reaches its maximum
refractive index of about 1.3658 at about 80% ethanol, thereafter
declining to 1.361.  In the neighborhood of this local maximum, fairly
large changes in the concentration of ethanol are needed to obtain
small changes in refractive index; for example, IOR is 1.3654 at 72%
ethanol, but 1.3657 at 76% ethanol.  This improves the control over
IOR that can be achieved despite errors in mixing.

Ethanol has the major disadvantage that it is a very small molecule,
so diffusion and consequent degradation of the instrument is likely to
be very fast.  Instead, larger molecules than sucrose would be
advantageous in order to delay diffusion further.

A perfectly flat “Fresnel” lens of jello with a thickness of about
200μm should be achievable with this approach.  A simple waveplate
pattern would provide an aspheric focusing lens, for example, although
at the cost of dispersion and some stray light from the boundaries
between the rings.  A thicker lens, probably thicker than normal glass
lenses, could reduce the number of rings (perhaps to 1) and thus
eliminate the stray light.  It should be feasible to fabricate an
entire compound microscope or telescope in a single solid block in
this way.

To prevent decay of the product (before it is destroyed naturally by
diffusion), some kind of antibacterial and antifungal agent should be
included.  Ethanol at levels above about 15% is one possibility;
sodium chloride is another; acids such as acetic acid or citric acid
are yet another.  Finally, a sufficiently high level of sugar would
also prevent decay, but that level might be high enough to prevent gel
formation.

It’s probably desirable to encapsulate the final result in some kind
of airtight container (sandwiched between glass plates, filling a
transparent polyvinylidene-chloride balloon, etc.) to prevent
evaporation from converting the result to a xerogel, which would
likely impair its optical properties.  Alternatively, if the
degradation is acceptable, xerogel conversion would protect against
decay, dramatically slow solute diffusion after drying, and reduce
layer thickness considerably, thus improving phase delay control.

Diffusion could also be controlled by chemically bonding the
index-altering solutes to the solid matrix of the gel, perhaps by
making the gel itself from a mixture of different substances with
different refractive indices, or perhaps just using glucomannan or a
similar dense gel former at different concentrations.  (What’s the
name of that hydrophilic polymer they use for contact lenses and
ceramic gelcasting?)

Correcting chromatic aberration probably requires multiple solutes
that induce different dispersions, thus varying IOR independently at
different wavelengths.

Avoiding air bubbles is of the highest importance.  The simplest way
to achieve this would be to do the entire printing process under
vacuum, but unfortunately that is not an option with a water-based gel
at room temperature, because water boils rather violently at room
temperature in vacuum.  Alternatively perhaps the product could be
degassed under vacuum before the gel forms, the way we do with
polyester resin casting, if there aren’t too many bubbles.  It would
be better to use a liquid (like, uh, polyester for resin casting) that
has a relatively low vapor pressure and therefore can be printed under
vacuum.

These gels are capable of substantial elastic deformation, often with
strains exceeding 10%, which provides another axis of variation; they
can be designed to provide an optical transformation which depends in
a designed way on elastic deformation.

To research:

- phase-delay spatial light modulators
- konjac gelification
- diffusion
- total internal reflection
- that nontoxic hydrophilic polymer they use for contact lenses and
  ceramic gelcasting
