It’s the 13th of February.  Today my friend Stace and her dad, who are
staying at my house, took delivery of a portable air conditioner,
which they’d bought on my behalf from the Coto department store around
the corner.  My apartment is cooling down now.

On Thursday, the 23rd of January, the official exchange rate had
jumped from $6 to the dollar to $8 to the dollar, apparently as a
result of a small sale of a few million pesos by Shell Oil.  The
official market is tightly controlled (payments for imports, for
example, must be immediately liquidated in it, providing it with a
large captive supply of dollars; and access to the peso side of the
market is strictly limited) and, apparently as a consequence, has very
little depth on the selling-dollars side.  The central bank stepped in
to force the closing price back down to $7.75 to the dollar, and the
newspapers were full of dueling accusations the next day, Friday.  The
true price went up from $10 to $12, and the buy-sell spread widened to
15% or so.  The government issued panicked pronouncements that the
restrictions on Argentines buying dollars would be lifted.

In the midst of this, I went to check out the price on this portable
air conditioner on Saturday, the 25th of January.  It was priced at
$4900, which is US$410 at the new true rate, or US$490 at the old true
rate, or US$600 at the new official rate, or US$800 at the old
official rate.

I was talking with my landlord during this time about repairing the
current air conditioner or replacing it with a new one, and he was
taking a while to get back to me; so on Tuesday, the 28th of January,
I went back with $5000 to buy the portable unit myself, so I wouldn’t
have to wait for him.  Within those three days, the price had been
increased by 40% to $7000, so I didn’t have the money.

The promised restriction-lifting turned out to be kind of a dud; it
entirely excludes the majority of the population (I guess the
government figures that poor Argentines don’t need to be able to save
money) and allows high-income people to purchase only very small
quantities.

The air-conditioner repairman called to tell me that the replacement
compressor the apartment’s unit needs no longer costs $800 or $900
like he’d expected, but rather $3000.  The landlord asked if maybe I
could pay the repair cost up front and then deduct it from my rent a
little bit at a time over the next few months.  I declined.

In an effort to stem the inflationary spiral, the government signed
agreements with the big supermarket and department-store chains to
freeze their prices at the levels of January 21, or in some categories
(like home appliances) to freeze them at 7.5% above the January 21st
levels.  I returned to Coto hoping to find the air conditioner price
reduced to $5375, but it was still $7000.

So I sent Stace with my money to buy the air conditioner and arrange
for delivery while I was at work.  She succeeded, but delivery wasn’t
scheduled for another week.

So now I have a sort of monochrome R2-D2 in my bedroom belching out
hot air onto my patio, cooling off my apartment and periodically
urinating into a bucket I’ve placed next to it.

Around town there are posters with the faces and names of the heads of
major chains: Walmart, Frávega, Coto, Shell.  The posters blame the
inflation on these chains’ choice to raise prices, which seems plainly
absurd to me in an environment where unions have been regularly
getting yearly raises above the rate of inflation.

***

Thursday morning, I took a bus home from an outlying neighborhood.
The fare was $8.  When I arrived in Buenos Aires in 2006, the highest
fare was $0.80.  But this is somewhat of an overstatement of
inflation, because I was only charged the cash fare rather than the
$3.90 card fare because my prepaid bus card was empty.

***

Some months ago, a garbage truck caught fire in the street outside the
office where I work.  The fire ignited six cars parked along the
street.  They burned until nothing was left but metal and carbon.  The
heat blistered the stucco and paint on the buildings on the street and
melted parts of the engine, which puddled in the street.  A chunk of
melted engine is now sitting on my bathroom vanity.

A week or two ago, I saw the last four of the six burned-out cars
finally being loaded onto a tow truck.  Now only the melted plastic
and blistered concrete bear witness to the conflagration.

***

When Darius was here, I tried to persuade him to buy a set of reading
glasses from a Senegalese street vendor, though without success.  A
couple of weeks ago, the Senegalese street vendors of Buenos Aires
suffered a sudden setback: the police raided all their houses early in
the morning to confiscate the watches, cheap jewelry, and eyeglasses
they sell on blankets around town --- as well as the blankets
themselves.  They protested by cutting off streets, but since they are
immigrants, public opinion is against them.

Macri, the mayor, used his new metropolitan police force to repress
the various street vendors.  This has been a project of his for some
time, and in at least one case they have shot street vendors with
rubber bullets to drive them out of an area.

Still, early-morning house raids seem like a new extreme of repression
against such a previously tolerated activity.  I wonder how much
longer San Telmo’s famous Sunday open-air market will last.  Perhaps
it will be spared, since it attracts so many tourists.

Macri’s party, PRO, is popular here in Buenos Aires, but fortunately
has little support nationwide.

***

The cockroaches are back.  I’ve set out fresh roach-bait traps, and
that seems to have slowed them down, but I still have a long way to go
before they’re eradicated.

I still haven’t reassembled the hot-water heater.  There’s a bag
somewhere in my apartment with the absolutely crucial faceplate and
spring parts of it, which I haven’t been able to find in months.  This
is starting to become a problem again as the weather cools down from
sweltering to merely sweaty.

***

Yesterday, we went to look at an apartment that we could possibly
share.  It’s 110 square meters with four potential bedrooms (one of
which is rather too small, and one of which lacks a door); the cost is
$4400 (US$400, say) plus $1300 expenses.  Gorgeous parquet floors,
huge living room, well-equipped kitchen with granite counters, noisy.
I was expecting the realtor to call me back today with information
about the water damage in the walls and access to the roof.

The other apartments we’ve been looking at have been similar in size,
but in large part since they’re in richer parts of town, they’re two
or three times as expensive.

