I’ve been trying to figure out if there’s a way, using salvaged
electronics, to store a series of high-speed analog waveforms long
enough to digitize them with a low-speed ADC, in order to make a cheap
DSO.  To be more specific, I want to digitize a channel or two with
signals at and above 20MHz, and thus a 40MHz Nyquist frequency, with
perhaps 1000 samples, with at least 8 bits of precision, stored
following an analog detection of a trigger signal, at varying sample
rates, and then digitize them with an ADC of 6Msps or less, promptly
enough to update an oscilloscope display many times per second.  So
those 1000 samples might be 25 microseconds, or 250 microseconds (with
elements up to 2MHz), or 2.5 milliseconds (at which point you’re only
covering up to 200kHz).

I considered a coaxial cable delay line, but 25 microseconds is almost
4 kilometers of coaxial cable, which would impose a fatal degradation
of signal-to-noise ratio.  I considered driving the deflector coils of
a TV tube or computer CRT with higher frequencies, but for 20MHz, the
inductance involved would require such high voltages that the coils
would almost certainly fail (see file `tv-oscilloscope`).  I
considered recording the analogue waveform on a hard disk (see file
`disk-oscilloscope`) and then digitizing it during succeeding
revolutions, which might work, but I don’t know enough about the
linearity and SNR.

So here’s another idea along those lines: use a laser-printer
mechanism, electroconductive drum and all.  A 10ppm A4-size 600dpi
laser printer must go through 210 mm × 297 mm of paper every 6
seconds.  That paper works out to almost 35 megapixels, which means
that the laser has to be modulated (and successfully recorded on the
drum) at 5.8 megapixels per second.

Unfortunately, this is not nearly fast enough, and of course the
linearity of the system is terrible.

Maybe the 64-microsecond acoustic delay lines that 1980s PAL
electronics used?  Those could be hard to find.

Better: see file `ccd-oscilloscope`.