Create and destroy population inversions to make lasing gain positive
or negative, thus providing high-gain amplification.  Pipeline bits
through optical fiber with length comparable to fiber diameter (≈8μm
or 30fs, thus enabling switching speeds in the tens of THz).  Doped
fiber sections pumped from the side by another laser produce an AND
gate in the obvious interpretation, but you can do better still with
Manchester encoding: the stimulated emission from one pulse leaves
behind a lack of population inversion which will attenuate following
pulses for a while.  Wideband-excitable materials like
trivalent-erbium-doped fiber amplifiers may permit wavelength-division
multiplexing in computation; the inhomogeneous-broadening-induced
effect known as “spectral hole burning”, usually considered a
nuisance, thus provides a way for pulses at one wavelength to
*suppress* pulses at nearby wavelengths.  Dynamic memory can also be
constructed by using a metastable population inversion to store each
bit, as long as the spontaneous-emission half-life is long enough to
permit a reasonably low-frequency refresh cycle.

Taking full advantage of these effects will require micron-precision
optical-path-length matching.

Induced emission from metastable nuclei
---------------------------------------

Increasing characteristic operating frequencies with these approaches
past the tens of THz requires stimulated emission or at least induced
emission at shorter wavelengths.  Induced or stimulated emission from
nuclear isomers provides a plausible route to six to nine orders of
magnitude faster operation; note that these timescales are so short
that even deep-sub-nanosecond-half-life nuclear isomers could be
useful, dramatically broadening the possible range of possibly useful
substrate materials, which should reduce potential conflicts between
this computational technology and proliferation concerns.  Aside from
the present difficulties of inducing metastable nuclear state decay,
this approach has another serious difficulty: controlling the flow of
high-energy gamma rays is more difficult than simply using optical
fibers.

Neutron-induced-fission logic
-----------------------------

Aside from the possibility of induced emission from
majority-metastable nucleus populations, neutron-induced fission has
been known since the 1930s and a practical energy source since the
1940s, and produces prompt neutrons within 10fs of the fission, and
they can be channeled to some extent by neutron reflectors.  However,
it is not entirely clear to me how to use this effect for computation,
since I don’t see how to combine two different neutron signals in
anything other than a sort of logical OR.  Moreover, aside from
proliferation concerns, computational devices built using this
approach would need the fissile nuclei physically replaced after
firing, a process that will surely take at least microseconds if not
entire seconds; so although a nuclear prompt-fission chain-reaction
logic device could compute with propagation delays in the femtosecond
range (if we figure out how to combine signals usefully), its clock
rate would be very low.