For decades, I’ve appreciated the aspiration of literate programming,
to produce software that can be pleasantly and easily read as
literature.  However, notably, for decades, literate programming has
remained unpopular.  I think the biggest reason for this is that
literate programming as we have practiced it so far omits one of our
most powerful tools for understanding programs in practice: running
them.

That is, standard literate programming tools like CWEB or noweb
include nothing in the readable text that is contingent on what the
program actually does when you run it.  Typical literate programs
don’t even include unit tests, which implicitly make claims about what
*would* happen if the program were to be run — if the author tells you
the unit tests succeed, then you can suppose that that is what
actually does happen.  In cases like tests written with Python
`doctest`, the test case shows the actual output from the program.

The Mathematica-derived “notebook” interface of IPython/Jupyter seems
like a promising step forward, because it does show example output.
Peter Norvig is working on a set of such notebooks called [pytudes][0]
to demonstrate some challenging problems.

[0]: https://github.com/norvig/pytudes

Jupyter notebooks are pretty awesome, but they have some limitations.
To wit:

Because Python is an imperative language, the interpreter state (and
thus the results of cell evaluation) depends not only on the contents
of the notebook, but also the order in which the cells have been
evaluated — and, potentially, even the number of times each cell has
been evaluated, and previous cell contents that were evaluated, even
if they no longer exist.

Perhaps worse, there’s no way to “export” a class, function, or value
defined in a notebook so that it can be used from elsewhere.  Each
notebook is relatively self-contained — for better or worse.  You
can’t use a notebook as a way to present and document one module of a
larger system, although you can use them as a way to document how to
*use* such a module.  (There is the somewhat primitive `%run`
mechanism, which I think is analogous to C’s `#include`.)

Jupyter notebooks are also less than ideal for multiuser use.  There
are a variety of ways you could imagine a multiuser notebook
working — for example, all the users could all be editing a single
shared document, or each one could have their own document that
imports certain cells from other documents, or some combination.

The flatness of Jupyter notebooks makes them hard to navigate once
they’re over a certain size.  Hyperlinks and folding could help.

However, it’s important to point out all the ways the Jupyter notebook
interface is vastly superior to traditional command prompts, REPLs,
and source code editing environments and even, in most cases,
traditional literate programming tools:

- Typography: headers, equations, bold and italics;
- Collapsible output (i.e. you can hide the output of a cell, and
  actually the whole cell, if you like);
- Multimedia output — plots, raw HTML, tables, equations.
- Pywidgets provides interactive experimentation with variable values.
