(Fiction!)

We are the Confederation of Teachers.  We exist to guide and preserve
society, not just of one group, but of all people, for the benefit of
all.  We came together because we believe society is important, but
society was in grave danger of sinking into the same barbarism that
nearly consumed it four generations before our foundation.  All of our
learning could have been lost; generations could have struggled merely
to survive to adulthood, as most have throughout most of history; and
society might perish on Earth, its cradle and its grave.

We were formed as a Third World War menaced the world, sending waves
of refugees out from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Crimea; as the
European Union, which had safeguarded peace during those four
generations, tottered; as a dangerous madman who loved only power was
near being elected the leader of the most powerful state in history;
and as the Industrial Age, powered by fossil fuels, steel, and
concrete, drew to its filthy close.  Suicide and obesity grew more
widespread year by year, and as the biosphere collapsed, irreplaceable
living species were lost at a rate not seen since the last asteroid
impact.  Yet human life expectancy had never been greater, literacy
had never been higher, and science progressed at a rate never before
seen.

We recognized that the existing social structure for guiding the
course of civilization, a bureaucratic extension of the violent
dominance hierarchies and genocidal territorial dynamics of ape
troops, were both manifestly inadequate to the task of preventing
total destruction and dangerously unstable in the face of nascent
technologies such as nuclear weapons, genetic engineering, ubiquitous
communication, space travel, self-replicating machinery, solar energy,
universal computation, and artificial general intelligence.  So we
came together to create new resilient structures so that
society could survive the most disruptive era of change in tens of
millions of years.

We seek the welfare of everyone, not the advantage of one tribe or
nation over another.  For this purpose, we study, and out of gratitude
to those who have taught us, we teach others, so that they too may
become teachers.  For this purpose, we consult among ourselves to
determine the best course of action for society, and then we guide
society to take that course.  For that purpose we investigate the
truth, each of us constantly seeking to become wiser, more ethical,
and more capable, and each supporting the others in this.  We serve
a higher purpose than any company, state, or political party, because
our loyalty is not merely to ourselves but to society as a whole.

We Teachers are all kinds of people: intelligent and dumb, female and
male, black and white, young and old, rich and poor, from every
country and every social class.  So far, we are all human, but if we
encounter nonhuman people, we will accept them too.  What counts is
what each of us contributes to the goals of the Confederation of
Teachers.  We do our best to value the contributions of each member
without regard to who originated them, struggling against our
prejudices which corrupt us into listening only to the words of those
we already know and respect.

To achieve these ends, we 

Scientia est eorum, quæ sunt cum demonstratione.
