These were some notes on a numerical method that at first I was
excited about, but which didn’t pan out; it was a way to compute
trajectories of systems of ordinary differential equations with high
accuracy, but it turns out not to apply to any interesting systems (at
least, none that I can find so far).  It can’t possibly work for
anything that isn’t linear and time-invariant (when augmented with
some set of auxiliary state variables), which I think means it is
limited to systems whose solutions are sums of complex exponentials.

Basics
------

The Euler method for approximating solutions of differential equations
is just a matter of

    x[0] = a
    for i in range(1, n):
        dxdt = f(x[i-1], t)        # calculate derivative at previous point
        x[i] = x[i-1] + h * dxdt   # extrapolate according to derivative
        t += h

which of course has some error if the derivative isn’t constant, an
error proportional to h² and d²x/dt² — according to the professor
lecturing yesterday, precisely ½h²d²x/dt² at some point within the
(open) extrapolated-over interval, although this obviously depends on
at least the second derivative in question being continuous.

The second-order Taylor method attempts to correct for this by adding
in ½h²d²x/dt² computed at the beginning of the interval, on the theory
that the second derivative changes slowly enough through the interval
that calculating it at the beginning is probably good enough.  And of
course you can use third-order or higher-order Taylor methods,
although you start to risk oscillations.

The Euler method, which is the first-order Taylor method, has an error
proportional to the interval size h²; the nth-order Taylor method has
error proportional to hⁿ⁺¹.  Since this error accumulates over many
intervals, at a given distance from the initial conditions (as opposed
to a given number of timesteps) it’s actually proportional to hⁿ, at
least.  This still means that if you want to simulate accurately, you
need some absurdly tiny interval size.

A variant of Euler’s method that I had some success with for the
special case of computing sin and cos was to represent the transition
function for a timestep as a matrix.  It happens that d/dt[sin t] =
cos t and d/dt[cos t] = -sin t, so that if we have a vector-valued x⃗
containing a purported (cos, sin) pair, Euler’s method would amount to
multiplying it by a matrix M(h):

    ⎡ 1  -h ⎤
    ⎣ h   1 ⎦

A problem is already evident in that this matrix’s determinant is
1+h², but if h is smallish, that can be a very small error.  But if h
is smallish, you have to do the multiplication a largish number of
times.

However, since it’s a matrix, you can compute a power of it
efficiently.  For example, by squaring it 16 times, you can compute
M(h)⁶⁵⁵³⁶, or by squaring it 32 times, you can compute M(h)⁴²⁹⁴⁹⁶⁷²⁹⁶.
This approach allows you to start with an exponentially small
incremental angle and thus compute with an exponentially small error
proportional to that angle.  This is sort of similar to using an
order-4294967296 Taylor method, but I’m not sure if it’s actually
equivalent.

It occurred to me that you could take this approach with the Euler
method in general: augment your system’s state vectors with extra
state variables that are the Nth derivatives of the original state
variables (with respect to time), and then use the Euler method in
this matrix form in order to get absurdly tiny timesteps.

In some cases, you’ll run out of (nonzero) derivatives pretty quickly,
or you’ll be able to write the new derivatives in terms of the known
ones, and you’ll get the same exponential-order characteristic as with
sin and cos.  In other cases, you’ll need to stop taking derivatives
at some point in order for the transition matrix you’re exponentiating
to fit into your L1D cache.  (Or, since the transition matrix is O(N²)
in the number of elements and will be dense after a few iterations,
you might run into a problem of diminishing returns.)

It also isn’t going to be efficient for systems that intrinsically
have a lot of degrees of freedom, even if their derivatives are
simple.  For example, if you have a 100×100 grid of values, your state
vector has 10,000 variables in it before you start augmenting it with
derivatives, which means that your transition matrix is 10,000×10,000,
containing 100 million elements; though maybe its initial state is
pretty sparse, it gets dense pretty quickly.

In some cases, you’ll have derivatives that are polynomials made of
multiple terms.  It may be advantageous to add each term, without its
coefficient, as a separate variable, as an auxiliary variable, rather
than adding the derivative as a whole.  For example, if y'(t) = 2y(t)
- 5 sin(t), then rather than adding a 2y(t) - 5 sin(t) row (and
column) to the matrix, you can just add a sin(t) row, sticking +2 and
-5 in the appropriate matrix cells.  (Then you'll need to add a cos(t)
row in the next step, and then you’re done, because cos(t)’s
derivative is -sin(t).)  For this purpose you might want to multiply
out more complicated derivatives into polynomials or ratios of terms.

In the sin/cos case and in the 2y(t) - 5 sin(t) example, the
transition matrix was constant, so neither it nor its exponent needed
to be recomputed.  For more general systems, that may not be the case.

Somewhat annoying example: y' = cos t²
--------------------------------------

Suppose dy(t)/dt = cos(t²), i.e., y = ∫ cos(t²) dt.  After five more
differentiation operations, we have seven functions from which we can
construct one another’s derivatives, and this allows us to construct a
7×7 matrix for taking an arbitrarily small step of Euler’s method:

    y'    = cos t²
    y''   = 2t cos t²
    y'''  = 2 cos t² - 4t² sin t²
    f     = t² sin t²
    f'    = 2t sin t² + WTF

Further investigation shows that my 7×7 matrix was bogus and this
method does not actually work for the cases I was interested in.  It
does work for some cases that already have closed-form solutions.

Substantially more annoying example: y' = cos y²
------------------------------------------------

Very annoying example: y' = cos (1/y²)
--------------------------------------

Relation to other methods of numerical integration of ODEs
----------------------------------------------------------

I think this is not the same as the extension of the Euler method to
higher-order differential equations, although it has in common with it
the idea of augmenting the original variables with some derivatives;
it is not the same as Taylor methods (though it shares with them the
idea of correcting the first derivative using higher derivatives) and
it has nothing in common with the Runge-Kutta method.  It is not a
multistep linear method; the transformation matrix (including any
power of it) implements a transition from a *single* previous state to
a *single* new state.

This is very similar to exponential integrators, but I think it is not
the same thing.
