Springs apply a force that increases as they are deformed from their
equilibrium form.  To compensate for this, old clocks and crossbows
use the horological fusee to compensate.

But, in electronics, to compensate for the similarly variable voltage
from batteries and especially from supercapacitors, we use buck
converters instead.  Buck converters periodically dump a pulse high
voltage into an inductor, which ramps up current rapidly in response,
and then ramps down (perhaps more slowly) when the high voltage is
disconnected.  The roughly constant but oscillating current through
the inductor is used to charge a capacitor, whose voltage oscillates
slightly as the current rises above and falls below the current drawn
by the load in parallel with it.  The voltage on the capacitor is used
to control the pulse width.

The mechanical equivalents of inductors and capacitors are springs and
masses, but there is a duality; interchanging current and voltage, and
inductance and capacitance, you get a new circuit that functions
similarly.

In this case the particular analogy I was thinking of was attempting
to maintain a constant but smaller force (analogous to voltage).  If
force is voltage, then velocity must be current, right?  Because the
thing you multiply force by to get power is velocity.  So the
component analogous to a resistor would be a dashpot, as expected:
velocity proportional to force.  The component analogous to an
inductor, with the force proportional to the derivative of velocity
(acceleration), must be a mass.  And so a capacitor must be a spring,
with the velocity proportional to the derivative of force, which is to
say, the position is proportional to the force.  So far, it all checks
out.

So periodically we allow velocity to flow briefly from the mainspring
to a mass, such as a flywheel, for example through a freewheel clutch
mechanism (analogous to a diode).  Then we use this flywheel to
energize a spring, such as a torsion bar, connected to a load.  The
torsion bar is maintained at a roughly constant but slightly
oscillating torsion as the flywheel is accelerated by the mainspring,
then left to slow down under the influence of that torsion bar or
whatever.  And then we use the total force in that spring to control
the duty cycle with which energy is dumped into the flywheel, by
applying and removing a brake (a clutch, really, connected to a fixed
shaft that cannot rotate) from the driving side of the freewheel.

It's easy to imagine two rotating actuators, one attached to the
flywheel and the other attached to the load, whose difference measures
the spring force in the torsion bar, like the pointer of a torque
wrench.  And you could imagine these two things engaging and
disengaging the clutch once per revolution.  You probably want those
revolutions to be pretty slow, like under 1 Hz, to get acceptable
clutch life.  You could achieve this either with a large flywheel or
by gearing down the relative motions of these timing devices.

So this gives you an efficient, if probably unreliable, kind of
continuously variable transmission, with a built-in governor that
produce a constant output force (torque), regardless of how fast the
output is rotating, as long as the input force is equal or greater.

As an alternative feedback mechanism, you could control the duty cycle
of the clutch to obtain a constant output velocity rather than a
constant output torque, for example using a centrifugal fly-ball
governor.

If we run this the other way around, we have a mechanical boost
converter instead.  In this configuration, the input shaft is allowed
to freely spin up a flywheel, which is at times not connected to any
load.  Periodically, however, a clutch is engaged, connecting the
flywheel to a freewheel which winds up a spring.  A second freewheel
keeps the spring from unwinding while the drive clutch is disengaged.

When the clutch is engaged, the flywheel can decelerate much faster
than the input drive, providing much greater force.  If the force
required is much greater than the force provided by the input, the
clutch will be disengaged most of the time, while if it is almost the
same, the clutch will be engaged most of the time.

All of these contrivances seem to me perhaps foolish compared to the
reality of continuously variable transmissions achieved by existing
methods.

In the world of hydraulics, the boost converter is well known in the
form of the hydraulic ram; I suspect that pursuing the analogy further
is likely to be fruitful.