Pointer arithmetic gives your languages freedom to implement different
kinds of storage, including stack-allocated, heap-allocated, structs,
arrays, struct extension with new fields on the end, linked lists, and
whatnot.  But it poses difficulties for safety.

The Forth virtual machine is fairly simple; as described in
`eforth-notes`, Bill Muench's eForth model, about 176 machine-code
instructions for the 8086, consists of EXIT, EXECUTE, _LIT, _ELSE,
_IF, C!, C@, !, @, RP@, RP!, >R, R@, R>, SP@, SP!, DROP, SWAP, DUP,
OVER, CHAR-, CHAR+, CHARS, CELL-, CELL+, CELLS, 0<, AND, OR, XOR, UM+,
REDIRECT, !IO, ?RX, TX!, and BYE, plus the machine-code routines
RESET, LIST1, and VCOLD.  Of these, the ones that access linear memory
are just C!, C@, !, and @, about 10% of the total.  Everything that
accesses memory does so by way of these four primitives.

However, when developing software and sometimes even when running it,
it's very convenient to get crashes and exceptions rather than wrong
answers, ideally as close to the bug as possible.  Using such a simple
memory model sacrifices that possibility, since there's no way to
distinguish out-of-array-bounds accesses, or integers wrongly
interpreted as pointers, from valid pointers.  Moreover, this makes
garbage collection impossible.  Can we define a virtual machine that
is *almost* as simple and flexible, but provides better safety
properties?

The rest of the Forth model
---------------------------

We can categorize the eForth code into control flow --- EXIT (i.e.,
return), EXECUTE, _IF, _ELSE, and LIST1; stack manipulation --- >R,
R@, R>, DROP, SWAP, DUP, OVER; meta-stack manipulation --- RP@, RP!,
SP@, and SP!; I/O operations --- REDIRECT, !IO, ?RX, TX!; startup and
shutdown --- RESET, VCOLD, and BYE; ALU operations --- _LIT, 0<, AND,
OR, XOR, and UM+; and portability helpers --- CHAR-, CHAR+, CHARS,
CELL-, CELL+, and CELLS.  This is a good approximation of a minimal
usable virtual machine, although probably subtraction, multiplication,
and division would be welcome additions.

My [StoneKnifeForth], inspired by eForth, has a different set of
primitives, some of which are things eForth implements in interpreted
Forth rather than in machine code, such as comments.  SKF is about
1400 instructions.  Its memory operations are @, !, and store, which
last is C!.

[StoneKnifeForth]: https://github.com/kragen/stoneknifeforth

The C pointer approach
----------------------

Suppose we define an untyped virtual machine whose memory supports the
four operations fetch word, store word, fetch byte, and store byte,
with register arguments to indicate the memory location to access, and
an allocate operation to allocate N bytes of new memory.  How can we
implement it efficiently with some degree of memory safety?

Maybe we can codify more or less the C pointer rules: make pointers be
(segment, offset) pairs, say 32 bits for each; mere integers have a
distinguished invalid segment value for the segment part, such as 0.
Subtraction of two pointers produces an integer if the segments are
the same or crashes your program if not.  Addition or subtraction of a
mere integer to a pointer produces another pointer within the same
segment.  Pointer comparisons for equality compare both the segment
and the offset.  Pointer comparisons for ordering crash if the segment
differs.  No other pointer arithmetic is valid.  The virtual machine
checks dereferences against an upper bound it stores for the segment.

The allocate operation creates a new segment and returns a pointer to
its start.

None of this stops programs from storing pointers in memory with the
store-word operation and then altering their segment bits; for
example, the XOR one-pointer double-linked-list hack can be
implemented in this way.  That means that garbage collection is not
safe.

This approach allows, for example, moving a struct that mixes pointers
and non-pointers to a different part of memory, in the same or a
different segment, merely using memcpy.  Note, though, that the
situation where this is most advantageous --- persistence to files or
transmission across a network --- can't take advantage of this,
because the segment bits will not be valid in the other process,
whether separated by space or by time.

The KeyKOS approach
-------------------

Suppose we want to be sure that a subroutine we invoke cannot forge
pointers to random memory, but only access data it has been given
segments for.  To prevent pointer forgery, we must strictly segregate
segment identifiers from character data and, for example, ordinary
integers.  It is okay for offsets into a segment to be freely
intermixed with character data, though.

One way to do this is to have separate byte segments ("segments" in
KeyKOS) and descriptor segments ("nodes" in KeyKOS).  Descriptor
segments contain only descriptors; byte segments contain only bytes.
The virtual CPU contains both descriptor registers and integer
registers.  Memory access instructions take an address consisting of a
descriptor and an integer offset; there are six of them --- load
descriptor, store descriptor, load integer, store integer, load byte,
and store byte.  Descriptors can only be loaded from and stored to
descriptor segments, while integers and bytes can only be loaded from
and stored to byte segments.  The only operation on descriptors, other
than storing them or using them in a memory access, is comparison for
equality.

There are a few variants of this approach.  Rather than having
separate segments, you could have a "data fork" (of bytes) and a
"resource fork" (of descriptors) for each segment; this avoids the
dynamic check, but means that instead of having separate
`allocate_byte_segment` and `allocate_descriptor_segment` calls, you'd
have one call that takes two arguments.  This way, a data structure
that contains both pointers (to, potentially, other segments) and byte
data can be a single segment, rather than a descriptor segment that
points to a byte segment.

Or the virtual machine could maintain a bit for each byte in the
segment, indicating whether it currently contains descriptor bytes or
non-descriptor bytes; loading it with the wrong operation would crash
your program.  Alternatively, only attempting to load a descriptor
register from non-descriptor bytes would crash the program, while
loading descriptor bytes into a data register would be fine.

This approach is not very compatible with the C or Forth view of the
world, and like varying-sized inline objects, it leads to a certain
amount of duplication in machine code --- you can't write generic
virtual machine code that agnostically handles either pointers or byte
data without caring which, even if you pass in a size, as you do with
qsort().  But it does seem like it would be workable, and it permits
garbage collection and prevents pointer forgery.

The Unix approach
-----------------

Suppose that a "process" identifies descriptors with integers, like
Unix programs identify files, when it makes "system calls"; we could
call them "handles".  It can never see the contents of the descriptors
themselves, just the integers that refer to them in its own local
namespace.  (KeyKOS did this in practice too, but the integers were in
a limited range, I think 0 to 15.)  If a different process has access
to the same descriptor, it is probably referred to using a different
handle.

For accessing byte data, rather than using effectively pread(2) and
pwrite(2) as in the proposals above, we can have an mmap(2)
instruction which maps the descriptor's byte data into the process's
linear memory space.  But what about accessing descriptor data, as in
`SCM_RIGHTS`, so that one descriptor can point to another?  Well, I
suppose you want an instruction something like openat(2), but taking
an offset rather than a filename.

So this gives us something like the following interface:

1. call(code1, handle1): starts a "new process" running code1 and
   waits for it to terminate.  Code1 runs in a new linear memory space
   with access only to the resource identified by handle1; a handle to
   that resource is passed to code1 at startup.
2. ret(): terminates the current "process".
3. open(handle1, offset): returns a newly allocated handle to the
   offsetth descriptor in the directory identified by handle1.
4. new(nbytes): returns a handle to a newly allocated segment of size
   nbytes.
5. del(handle1): deallocates the resource identified by handle1, which
   may be a segment or a directory.
6. mkdir(n): allocates a new directory with space for n descriptors in
   it.
7. link(handle1, offset, handle2): sets the offsetth descriptor in the
   directory identified by handle1 to the descriptor identified by
   handle2.
8. map(handle1): maps the segment identified by handle1 into the
   caller's linear memory space and returns the address where this
   happened.

Maybe not quite as clean as Unix's open, close, read, write, fork,
exec, exit, wait, or Forth's C!, C@, !, and @, but it's manageable;
and, unlike Unix, it provides full confinement.  And it doesn't have a
way to prevent child processes from leaking memory; I thought about
adding a "pool" parameter to "new" and "mkdir" and a "spawn" call that
creates a child pool, and making "free" take a (handle to a) pool
rather than a segment; this would allow limiting the resources used by
child processes as well.  But it does permit precise garbage
collection, so in some sense pools are extraneous.

Of course, unlike in Unix, these operations are virtual machine
instructions rather than system calls.

KeyKOS had an operation to weaken a regular key to a "sense key", a
read-only capability, so that you could provide read-only access to a
resource you had read-write access to.

This interface doesn't permit multithreading, since call() is
synchronous, and so it can't be robust in this form against child
processes that hang forever.  KeyKOS handled this in part by requiring
a "clock key" to run a process; if the referenced clock didn't have
any time on it, the process couldn't run.  The Unix approach is,
rather alarmingly, to make subprocess invocation implicitly
asynchronous, thus requiring the creation of a new task.

A transactional linear-logic approach
-------------------------------------

If you add any concurrency or crash recovery to the approach described
above, there is a new class of serious potential bugs that the virtual
machine cannot detect and signal.  If a segment can be concurrently
mapped by two different threads and is writable by at least one of
them, they can have race conditions.  If we were to take the Unix
approach and make call() asynchronous, this would implicitly happen on
every call(), since the parent process still has access to everything
it's passed to the child.

If instead we *transfer ownership* of resources to the newly created
child process, so that the parent cannot access them until and unless
the child returns them, we can avoid this problem.  But this means
that, if recovery from failure is to be possible, the child must
return them in case of failure and also in case of success.

Handling failures this way suggests that perhaps the child should be
run in a separate transaction, with all of its writes held in abeyance
until its successful completion.  Handling successes this way suggests
that perhaps freeing a resource should only be possible to someone who
holds a descriptor to the pool the resource was allocated from.  But,
by itself, that will not prevent the child from linking its resources
into a cycle that is inaccessible from outside.  Something like the
tree discipline of the Unix filesystem is needed to prevent that.  See
file `failure-free` section "Pointer-reversal tree traversal" about
why I think approaches like this will tend to be insufficient.

A Rustier approach
------------------

If the same segment is mapped more than once by the same process, and
one or more of the mappings is read-write, it may suffer aliasing
bugs.  The classic example of this is the trick for swapping two
values without a temporary variable:

    a ^= b;  // a == a0 ^ b0
    b ^= a;  // b == a0 ^ b0 ^ b0 == a0
    a ^= b;  // a == a0 ^ b0 ^ a0 == b0

which you would want to be a no-op if a and b were the same value, but
which instead obliterates the value and replaces it with a 0.

Rust avoids this problem by "borrowing" references for a statically
determined lifetime; although my Rust is pretty limited so far, if I
understand correctly, the creation of mutable references and of
read-only references is a prerequisite to accessing an object, no
mutable reference to it can be created during the lifetime of any
reference to it, and no reference to it can be created during the
lifetime of any mutable reference to it.

You could imagine segments being treated in this way, dynamically
rather than statically.  To map a descriptor read/write into your
memory space or to pass a mutable reference to it to another process
or store it in a directory, there would need to exist no references or
mappings to it anywhere; to map it read-only or to pass a read-only
reference to it to another process or store it in a directory, there
would need to exist no read/write mappings or mutable references to it
anywhere.

I'm not sure if that approach is feasible, but it seems promising.
