HTTP has an “ETag” attribute, short for “entity tag”, to identify the
current state of a resource, which can be usefully used in four ways:

- In the response to a GET or HEAD request, to inform the client what
  the current ETag of the resource is, making the other three uses
  possible;
- In the If-None-Match header of a GET request, to request that the
  server not send (a representation of) the resource if it hasn’t
  changed (validating the cache to ensure it hasn’t gotten too out of
  date);
- In the If-Match header of a PUT request, to execute a kind of atomic
  compare-and-swap for safe lock-free concurrency, preventing the
  request from executing if the resource has changed since it was last
  fetched;
- In the If-Match header of a byte-range GET request to ensure that
  the underlying file hasn’t changed in a way that would make previous
  byte-range requests invalid.

These three kinds of concurrency control, however, are limited by the
request-response nature of the REST architectural style, which can
only propagate invalidation notifications by polling; thus, it faces
an unavoidable painful tradeoff between expected notification latency
and polling load, [as described in Khare’s dissertation][0].  Various
approaches to this have been suggested, including Khare’s proposed
WATCH method for HTTP and the [RFC 7641 Observe option for CoAP][1],
which are very similar to one another, but in practice the most common
solutions today are [HTTP long polling][2] and WebSockets, which are
effectively ways to tunnel arbitrary application-layer protocols on
top of HTTP.

[0]: http://www.ics.uci.edu/~rohit/Khare-Thesis-Duplex.pdf
[1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7641
[2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6202 "Known Issues and Best Practices for the Use of Long Polling and Streaming in Bidirectional HTTP"

There are a number of potential problems with the straightforward
implementation of the Observer pattern in a distributed system,
modified only by a timeout, as proposed by Khare’s dissertation and
RFC 7641:

1. There is no flow control to the stream of update messages.  If the
   client has a 10kbps connection, while the server has a 100Mbps
   connection, then under circumstances of constant updates, a
   500-byte subscription can result in the client’s network connection
   being overwhelmed by four orders of magnitude more traffic than it
   can handle, until the subscription expires.

2. One of the great benefits of REST is its stateless-server
   constraint; by storing all session state on the client, it enables
   easy horizontal scalability of servers (including by serving the
   same resource from many physical servers), allows servers to
   operate reliably and correctly even with extremely limited
   resources, simplifies failure recovery, and permits extremely large
   client-to-server ratios.  These event-notification proposals,
   however, obligate servers to maintain unbounded amounts of session
   state on behalf of clients.

3. Thus, the subscription itself becomes a long-lived resource on the
   server; to support subscription inspection and cancellation, we
   begin to desire defined protocols and content-types to manage the
   subscription, not to mention authentication and access control
   lists.  This adds undesirable complexity not only to the server but
   also to the protocol suite.

4. A typical factor we examine for network deployments nowadays is
   their DoS potential, as measured by their amplification factor — if
   an attacker forges a request from a victim, how much traffic can
   they direct to the victim?  These proposals have potentially very
   large DoS potential.

I would like to suggest a minimal extension to HTTP and similar
protocols which covers most publish-subscribe use cases and largely
solves the above problems.

The solution
------------

The client includes a new ETag-Change-To header which includes a
webhook URL.  The server is free to ignore this header or to add the
webhook URL to a set of observers it maintains for the current ETag of
the resource being requested.  When the resource’s state changes, it
sends the URL of the resource in an HTTP request to each webhook in
the observer set for the old ETag, then discards that observer set.
This allows the client, if they are still interested, to immediately
retrieve the new state of the resource (possibly resubscribing), while
bounding the maximum possible traffic to one in-flight message at a
time, and the maximum possible cost imposed on the server to sending a
single such message.

By atomically adding the webhook to the set associated with the ETag
associated with the representation that was actually retrieved, we
ensure that no updates happen after the retrieval but before the
subscription.

In contexts like CoAP, protocols other than HTTP might be more
appropriate for delivering these cache invalidation notifications.
For example, an additional CoAP Response message — as with the RFC
7641 Observe option, but lacking the payload — may be a perfectly
adequate solution, since CoAP imposes no constraints on how far in the
future that message can be sent; or a CoAP Request message analogous
to the HTTP request to a webhook may be more appropriate.

This approach is not better under all possible circumstances.  At
times, as mentioned in Khare’s dissertation, it’s desirable to have
many update messages in flight at the same time; a stock-price logging
application might prefer to see all the intermediate market prices of
a stock, even when they are milliseconds apart and it is separated
from the data source by hundreds of milliseconds of latency.  However,
there is a very broad range of applications for which the drawbacks of
such streaming data are greater than their advantages.

Furthermore, in many cases, the appropriate response to such a cache
invalidation message is not to update the cache, but rather merely to
purge the cache, possibly generating further cache invalidation
messages.

Since the server is not required to store the ETag-Change-To webhook,
the server may suffer a hardware failure, and in any case the
invalidation message may be lost, the client must still poll the
resource at intervals determined by its maximum tolerable staleness
time.

As an alternative that doesn’t depart from the strict request-reply
discipline, we could instead use a GET request with a new
When-None-Match header, which delays the response to the request until
the resource’s ETag no longer matches the supplied ETag.  That is, if
the ETag is different, the server will respond immediately, as if with
If-None-Match; but if the ETag is the same, the server will simply
acknowledge that the request has been received, and perhaps send a
response at some later time.

Derived resources
-----------------

[Mediators like Shodouka, Google Translate][3], [CritLink][4], and the
[Jupyter Notebook Viewer][5] host virtual resources derived from other
resources whose URLs are passed as query parameters.  These resources
could, in principle, be cacheable — they only change when the
underlying derivation code changes, or when the source resources do.
(In practice, the Jupyter Notebook Viewer is rather annoyingly
aggressively cached.)

[3]: http://zesty.ca/mediator.html
[4]: http://zesty.ca/crit/yee-crit-cscw2002-demo.pdf
[5]: http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/url/norvig.com/ipython/Economics.ipynb

If such resources wanted to participate in this kind of push cache
invalidation, they would probably be best served by propagating cache
invalidations downstream when they received them, rather than
refetching upstream resources to repeat their mediating
transformation, perhaps many times, in order to keep up-to-date a
resource that will perhaps never again be used.