I was thinking about [Zdog](https://zzz.dog/) and my [similar
`<canvas>` hack](http://canonical.org/~kragen/sw/81hacks/topopt-ar)
the other day for `dercuano-drawings`, and today watching Κορη play a
slightly-3D game, it occurred to me that a little bit of
texture-mapping would go a long way to help the illusion of depth.

But both my hack and Zdog are based on, basically, spheres.  How do
you texture-map a sphere?  The mapping from screen space to texture
uv-coordinates has a couple of singularities (where the line of sight
is tangent to the sphere) and so can’t be reasonably approximated with
a polynomial; Babbage’s Method of Finite Differences is out of the
question.

Consider the plane that includes the viewpoint and a scan line on the
screen.  The intersection, if it exists, between a sphere and this
plane is a circle; along that circle we will find the points on the
sphere that are visible in that scan line.  If we consider only
orthographic projection for a moment, we can use the standard midpoint
algorithm for rasterizing circles to find the coordinates of the
points in this circle.  We may be able to use texel-sized steps if the
sphere is close enough.

If we’re using a solid texture, that’s all we need — we apply the
texture function (suitably strength-reduced) to the coordinates and
get the colors to paint, but if we’re using a flat texture, we may
need to map from 3-D space to the texture’s uv-space.  Ideally we can
use a polynomial fit (again, strength-reduced) to map into that space.

Adding perspective back in is a matter of stretching the middle of the
scanned texture pixels while compressing the ends, some all the way to
zero.  We should be able to do this with a simple polynomial
approximation, probably cubic, of the transformation from the
orthographic view to the perspective view.

Actually, though, can’t we do this all the way through?  The
transformation from screen pixel space to texel space has two
singularities in it, but the inverse transformation, from texel space
to screen pixel space, is singularity-free and actually relatively
calm.  Perhaps we can just walk along the texels on the appropriate
path along the sphere’s texture map, with a stride size small enough
to transform at least two texels to every screen pixel, transforming
each one to screen space and painting it into a screen buffer.  A
strength-reduced cubic spline should be perfectly adequate.
