I haven’t played Minecraft, but I’m terribly addicted to Minetest, an
open-source clone of it.  What is it that makes the game so
captivating?

When I start a fresh game, there’s a carefully graduated slow
exponential increase in the character’s power.  At first they can only
dig dirt, break trees with their hands, and transplant plants; once
they’ve acquired some wood to make a wooden pickaxe, they can mine
stone and make a stone pickaxe, which allows them to mine stone more
quickly, and then a stone axe, which allows them to chop trees more
quickly; and some coal, which allows them to make torches, which makes
it practical to mine underground and in caves, which makes it far
easier to find coal and then metals; and so on.  The sequence varies a
bit depending on what environment your character finds themself in.  I
had a world where I had to travel a long way to find any wood, for
example, and where I never did find any roses, which are necessary to
make a bed.  In the world I’m currently playing, it took me a long
time to find a jungle, which is where you find the jungle grass you
can convert into cotton seeds in order to start farming cotton, also
necessary for beds.

There’s a certain balance needed between surface farming and deep
mining.  There’s a progression of tool types — wood to stone to steel
to bronze to crystals (diamonds and the softly glowing mese
crystals) — which roughly corresponds to how deep you need to go to
find the necessary materials.  But to dig deep quickly you need
ladders, and ladders require lots of wood, which can only be obtained
on the surface.  (Mina likes playing with mods that add monsters, make
ladders cheaper, and add hunger, which also generally requires that
you go to the surface to satisfy it.)  At different points in the
game, different resources are the limiting resource for whatever you
want to do, and you can play for many hours before you run out of
things in the world that surprise you.

And, in the mining process itself, you’re always looking for something
that’s fairly rare, and you will run across its random occurrences at
a frequency proportional to how hard you look.  At the surface, even
coal may require searching for quite a while, and iron is not found at
all.  Later, once you have iron tools, you can easily dig down far
enough that you can find more coal and iron than you need, but if you
know bronze tools are better, it takes a while to find enough copper.
And once you’re deep enough to find enough diamond and mese that you
don’t need to use metal tools any more, it can still take a lot of
searching to find each new crystal deposit, and you’re frequently in
danger of stumbling into lava.  This proportional variable reward
mechanic means that, in addition to the overall macroscopic reward
schedule for continuing to play, you have a microscopic reward
schedule where you know that the very next stone you punch with your
pick could have diamonds or mese crystals behind it, making the whole
journey down from the surface worthwhile.  This makes it easy to keep
playing for just one minute more.  In fact, it makes it easy to forget
to eat in real life.  Or sleep.  Or go to class.  Or go to work.

All this is to say that the reward schedule is well calibrated,
somewhat randomized, and robust to player strategy.  But I think
there’s another reason as well.

My apartment is three meters wide, 2.6 meters tall, and thirteen
meters long.  At one end, it has a glass window, which is about two
meters square.  The walls, ceilings, and floors are white, and there
is a bit of a recess around the edges of the ceiling.  I pay US$300 a
month to live here, despite the inconstant and often uncomfortable
temperature and troublesome noises, especially on weekend nights.

I just constructed a sort of replica in Minetest, in a world where I
had already been playing and thus already had crystal tools, about 40
meters underground rather than in the sunlight.  Replicating my
real-world living space as described above took me 33 minutes;
although that doesn’t include the time to cultivate, harvest, and mine
the wood, diamond, sand and coal consumed in the process, I think the
direct labor on the building was the bulk of it.  Merely digging out a
13×3×3 space out of gray rock would have been much quicker, less than
five minutes, but I made the extra effort to reduce the ceiling height
from the usual 3 meters to 2.5, adding the glass window at the end
with a light source behind it, and making the walls, ceiling, and
floor white with a sandstone pattern like the one printed on my
real-world ceramic floor tiles.

Of course, the Minetest replica doesn’t have a bidet, air
conditioning, internet access, hot water, natural light, or
conveniently walkable 24-hour hamburger shops like my real-world
apartment does.  But it’s a lot tidier, and I can remodel it
completely in another half-hour if I want.  Moreover, I’m not likely
to run out of space to put things, which in real life can be a
problem; this world currently has about 1 km × 2 km generated
horizontally, and I've dug almost 500 meters down, and it’s only 49
megabytes, very little of which is the underground palace I added the
apartment replica onto.

Aboveground, the palace does have its own stand of lumber trees, a
giant outdoor fountain I built and am using to irrigate a cotton crop,
and a watch tower with a beautiful view of the sunrise; indoors, it
has a mushroom cultivation area, a 49-square-meter dojo with a mosaic
floor, chests full of copper and gold ingots, ovens baking bread from
wheat cultivated upstairs, a fireplace, and a room illuminated through
its glass floor by lava running below.  (In another Minetest world, I
built a continuously erupting volcano visible from my balcony that,
unfortunately, burned down a forest.)

So, like nearly all video games, Minetest offers a sense of competence
and progressively increasing power.  Minetest is also a medium of
expression like that provided by painting and CAD programs.  But,
probably most addictively, Minetest is a sort of animated dollhouse: a
vehicle for a convincing fantasy of living a good life, though it is a
life involving a great deal of smashing rocks and hauling them up mine
shafts.  Like literal dollhouses, you can play in it alone or with
friends or even strangers; it supports sharing your virtual reality
over a LAN or the internet.

Also, in some ways, it goes beyond literal dollhouses: it provides an
illusion of travel.  Like any first-person three-dimensional game, the
screen contents are in almost constant apparent motion toward you,
triggering your orienting response and making it easy to pay
attention, and you can travel around, explore the world, learn where
things are, and find more things.
