A minimal transaction processing system
---------------------------------------

(See also file `minimal-dependency-system`.)

The data store is a key-value store that supports set(k, v), get(k) ->
v, and getNextAfter(k) -> (k, v) operations; keys and values are
arbitrary bytestrings, and keys are ordered lexicographically.

You start with a transaction running as an isolated virtual machine.
It has the above-mentioned data-store operations available, plus
sbrk(n), commit() (which exits), fail(), and fork(), which commits the
current transaction and creates two new coequal transactions with
copies of the same memory, though one is running a different
subroutine.

It starts by reading through a section of the key-value store (perhaps
`"tx/" < k && k.startswith("tx/")`) where it expects to find source
code for transactions to run.  For each key of source code found, it
fork()s a child transaction that reads that source code, compiles it
into memory, and starts running it.  When it finds no more source
code, it invokes fail().

When a transaction invokes fail(), its writes do not become visible to
other transactions, but the set of get() and getNextAfter() calls it
made is remembered.  If the data store changes in a way that would
change what those calls saw, the transaction is retried.  The system
has the option to transparently checkpoint the transaction at any
point and rerun it from there, rather than from the beginning — this
is why fork() commits, because the child transactions are externally
visible side effects.

These initially compiled transactions are mostly “servers”.  They look
for messages in some section of the key-value store and, like the
initial transaction, fail() if nothing is there.  But if something is
there, they spawn a child transaction to process it (and then fail if
it’s still there, to avoid repeatedly processing the same thing
repeatedly.)

A transaction that has not yet committed will also be pre-emptively
fail()ed by the system if it has previously read data that has now
changed — when it attempts to commit(), if nothing else.

Initially I thought that after fork() the parent transaction should
continue as before, but then I realized that it might fail, so either
fork() needs to commit, or the child transaction needs to be nested,
which would prevent writing servers.  Then I resigned myself to the
idea that, since the server must commit on every iteration, it
wouldn’t be automatically restarted if its source code changed.

Now, though, I realize that it is possible to have my cake and eat it
too: ancestor transactions’ read sets can be included in your read
set, so if your source code changes, you can be instantly rolled back
and recompiled, even though your committed ancestor transactions won’t
be rolled back.  I think.  I’m not sure how to make that work with
message queues yet.

This form of IPC implicitly and modularly supports a wide variety of
different communication patterns and both batch and interactive
computing.  If you want to wait for a message at either location a or
location b, you do this:

    a = get("a");
    b = get("b");
    if (a == null && b == null) fail();

If you instead want to wait until both messages are present before
proceeding, you do this:

    a = get("a");
    b = get("b");
    if (a == null || b == null) fail();

If you want to get a message if one is present, but continue anyway if
one is not, then you can handle nullness by a method other than
failure:

    c = get("key");
    if (c != null) { /* handle keypress */ }

Because it doesn’t support nested transactions, you can’t directly
turn blocking subroutines into nonblocking ones as with the orElse
operator in the Composable Memory Transactions paper; if you want to
be able to make a failure blocking or nonblocking, you should return
that failure up the stack to the point where you actually want to make
that decision.  For example, the first example above might read as
follows, assuming a context where a successful return value cannot be
null:

    a = get("a");
    b = get("b");
    if (a == null && b == null) return null;

You could spawn off a blocking subroutine into a child transaction
that stores its result back to you somewhere that you’re looking for
it in a nonblocking fashion, but because fork() commits, this
interferes with modularity.

This system is very simple, with only seven system calls (three of
which take no parameters), full ACID transactions, and no explicit
deadlock, although of course you can arrange communication patterns to
provide deadlock.  It should be possible to implement it extremely
efficiently.

The definition of the store as a simple byte-blob key-value store is
not essential to the system; it could have nearly any form
whatsoever — relational, hierarchical, with private namespaces,
graph-structured, message queues, tuple spaces, seekable files, a
distributed transactional store, typed values, whatever.  The
byte-blob key-value store is just a minimal approach.