I want a Wiki thing that provides some kind of knowledge ratchet for
the things I work on in my spare time.  In particular, I want to be
able to write things on my cellphone (including calculations) and not
lose them or have them inaccessible from another cellphone or
computer.

The absolute minimal mechanism for this is some kind of text formatter
that supports wiki links and some kind of sync protocol.  The simplest
feasible sync protocol is probably something like this, with each
speaker uttering an append-only numbered sequence of lines:

“Give me any lines from Bob in the range 206–215.”  
“Bob line 206 is wejgoiewjgojagoijg.”  
“Bob line 207 is 302t020ujgs.”  
“Give me any lines from Alice in the range 201–211.”  
“Alice line 201 is jw0t23it20s.”

This requires some kind of out-of-band mechanism for noticing that the
connection has been established, or deciding when to make the request,
and it doesn’t have any “now you are up to date” indicator or any way
to indicate failure.  However, it doesn’t leave the door open for
unbounded quantities of future messages, all the messages are
idempotent, it’s convergent when messages are lost or when individual
nodes fail or are restarted, and it doesn’t require any session state.
And it works as publish-subscribe as well as fetch-store.  (You could
even add sender-side message filters.)

It doesn’t accommodate new speakers at this level of the protocol.
Much.  I mean normally you would only ever send a requested line but I
guess you could make an exception.

Making this work offline on a cellphone is easiest in a browser app in
JS.  This suggests that maybe the server should be JS too, probably
using Node.  If I want to run it on adjuvant, though, which is
probably a decent idea for prototyping, a CGI program is probably
better.  (Adjuvant doesn’t have working TLS at the moment, though.  I
could probably fix that.)

You could require that the channel names (“Alice”, “Bob”) be public
key hashes and that the lines each be signed.  This probably isn’t
necessary for an initial prototype.

A browser app can itself be cached with a cache manifest, but it needs
some way to store the data being synchronized.  LocalStorage is the
easiest and gives 5 megacharacters; WebSQL on Mobile Safari gives
another 5 megabytes, and IndexedDB also works on Mobile Safari and
supposedly gives 50 megabytes.  On my browser, using the Browser
Storage Abuser, it claims to have gotten 910 MB, but half the time it
doesn’t load at all.  And it seems to be persistent after a month and
a half, which is probably long enough to reconnect to the internet at
least once.

Text formatting with wiki links could be something along the lines of

    input.replace(/&/g, '&amp;')
         .replace(/</g, '&lt;')
         .replace(/"/g, '&quot;')
         .replace(/\n\n/g, '\n<p>')
         .replace(/\[(.*?)\]/g, '<a href="$1">$1</a>')

although obviously you could go quite a bit further with real Markdown
or something.  Markdown is not ideally suited for Wiki markup but it
can work.

You need some kind of interface for handling update conflicts.

IndexedDB is the tricky bit here.  With IndexedDB, I can quite
reasonably store 50MB of text — perhaps compressed, so more like
150MB.  But IndexedDB is not a very stable interface, and it’s kind of
complicated.  Firefox by default treats it as a cache; specifying
`{storage: "persistent"}` requires using an interface that is
incompatible with Chrome and probably Safari.  Worse, when Firefox
evicts, it evicts the entire origin; there’s no way to ask that it
please save a little bit of data.  (Although maybe a cookie or
something would work.)  And the callback approach recommended in MDN
doesn’t work in Chromium.  (Oh, wait, it does.  You just have to add
the callbacks early enough, and subsequent opens are blocked until the
earlier ones are closed.)

The IndexedDB interface is, like, you open a database, and it gives
you a database-opening callback during which you can create and delete
tables (“object stores”).  Then once it’s open, you can open a
transaction on it, and in the transaction you can execute get, put,
and delete on the tables.  All of this is hidden behind an
event-driven interface.  In some browsers you can do this:

    try {
      let db = await indexedDB.openDatabase('db')
        , tx = db.transaction('store')
        , store = tx.objectStore('store')
      ;
      await store.put('value', 'key');
      console.log('Put is totally done');
      await tx;
      console.log('Committed');
    } catch (ex) {
      console.log(ex.message);
    }

But I’m not sure the iPhone browser I want to use is among them.