Electromechanical relays have some lovely features: they can provide
galvanic isolation, very high crosstalk immunity, enormous gain, very
low on-impedance, and, in locking designs, bistability even when the
power goes out.

However, they have some big problems: they’re power-hungry and their
operating speed is limited to the kHz to tens of kHz and their
operating life is limited to thousands to millions of operations,
which usually limits them to *average* operating speeds in the
millihertz or less.

The reason for the short operating life is contact oxidation.  (In
theory elastic metal fatigue or creep could play a role too, but those
are easy enough to avoid.)  Mercury-wetted relays are a common design
to lengthen this life, and file `paper-foil-relays` discusses the
possibility of using contacts of carbon (like keyboard dome switches),
silver, or gold instead.

In other sense-switch applications, a common approach to avoiding the
oxidation problem is to use phenomena other than conduction to
transfer the energy.  The TRS-80 keyboard, for example, was capacitive
(though using springs made of polyurethane foam, which degraded
rapidly), as are modern touchscreens, touchpads, and some touch panels
in embedded devices.  And there are numerous inductive sensors for
position, orientation, and so on.

It occurs to me that relays can work through these media as well.

For example, if you have two ferrite rods with one winding around each
of them, you can make them into a transformer that efficiently
transfers AC power from one to the other, from dozens of Hz up to
several kHz, by completing the magnetic circuit with more ferrite.  By
moving this additional ferrite under the control of a solenoid, you
have a relay, one that will never suffer contact oxidation, because
the contacts are magnetic rather than electrical.

Similarly, although the circuits described in file `paper-foil-relays`
are the usual kind of dc-coupled contact circuits, you could use a
similar design to bring one of the plates of a variable capacitor into
contact with the dielectric from a distance far enough to drop the
capacitance by orders of magnitude.  This could easily have enough
capacitance to efficiently transmit power at frequencies of 100 MHz
and up, again without any electrical contact and thus no oxidation.
Such capacitive relays could move smaller amounts of mass, and over
shorter distances, than the inductive relays described above, and so
they should be able to operate much faster.

