I talked briefly with the pariah Notch on the hellsite the other day,
thanking him for writing Minecraft.  He mentioned that he enjoyed
reading Knuth; one of his followers asked if Notch had left Knuth’s
work TAOCP unopened when Notch learned that Knuth was opposed to some
of Bush’s policies, including the US invading Iraq.

This seemed sad to me.  What would it take for a person to not read
Knuth for such a reason?  Not only would they have to belong to Bush’s
faction, they would have to consider it more important that Knuth
belonged to an opposing faction than what Knuth knew or didn’t know
about computer programming.

It seemed to me that this follower was arrogating to themself the
right to judge Knuth’s worth, on the basis that Knuth belonged to the
other faction, the inferior faction.  I have no reason to believe that
the follower was a person of significant intellectual achievements
themself, much less a scholar of Knuth’s stature, but they seemed to
consider this irrelevant; for them, dismissing Knuth’s work as
worthless, even repugnant, was their prerogative for belonging to the
correct faction of the culture war.

In this sense, the elevation of factional alignment over scholarly
achievement necessarily implies the elevation of ignorant and foolish
thugs over scholars — not, perhaps, all scholars, but at least
scholars of opposing factions.  Moreover, the assignment of a scholar
to a faction depends not on scholarly criteria but on thug criteria.
This is the principle by which Archimedes was struck down in Syracuse
by a Roman soldier, by which Sulla burned the Academy, by which Nazi
ruffians burned the books of Jewish scholars who were their superiors
in every way, and by which Qin Shi Huang burned the books and buried
the scholars.  This is the principle by which the Boxers burned the
Yongle Encyclopedia, the greatest encyclopedia the world knew before
Wikipedia, and by which Mossad thugs assassinated the Iranian nuclear
scientists.  And this is the reasoning behind the prosecution of my
friend Aaron Swartz.

Such an inversion of priorities is inevitable in wartime — when Julius
Caesar set fire to the Library of Alexandria, he had intended only to
set fire to his ships, not to the library.  A human will do nearly
anything in their futile effort to secure their own survival, even if
it puts at risk values much more precious.

Subjugating the wise to the foolish and ignorant leads invariably to
tragedy.  The ruler who listens to the counsel of fools brings waste
to their land and poverty to their people.  And this is what we do
when we prize ideology and factional loyalty over wisdom and learning.

Yet are we to honor learning even in the service of evil?  Should the
Iranian nuclear scientists be permitted to put the fire of the stars
in the hands of the mullahs who rule their land with such cruelty and
injustice?

These problems arise when the scholars accept this perversion of
harmonious order, willingly serving as mere instruments of ignorant
and foolish people.  By pledging their loyalty to those who follow not
truth and prudence but domination and power, those whose position owes
not to wisdom and learning but to brutality and intimidation, they
abdicate their responsibility to speak the truth and serve the
well-being not of one faction but of the world.

True scholars serve a master higher than any government or movement,
as exemplified by Socrates’s suicide, by the defensive fortifications
of the Mohists, and by the false legend of Galileo’s defiant “Eppur si
muove.”  This is the reason for the principles of academic freedom.
Scholars who speak their minds even when it is unpopular, who act in
the service of truth and benevolence as they understand it, these
scholars are the noblest and best of humanity.  Even their enemies
should honor them.  But servile scholars who allow themselves to be
employed by other people, as if they were pieces of equipment; who
obey rather than choosing; who lie and who remain silent in the face
of injustice in order to help their own government or faction; those
are no scholars at all but mere pedants.
