I’m reading Wirth’s _Project Oberon_, feeling it might be useful for
BubbleOS.

Certainly I am not going to take the severe approach he claims was
essential (p. 8):

> Concentrate on essential functions and omit embellishments that
> merely cater to established conventions and passing tastes.

To a great extent, whimsy is the entire raison d’être of BubbleOS,
thus Tetris (216 lines of C), Toki (some 130, not counting the data
tables), and Cuerdas Caóticas; does that doom it?  Certainly many
embellishments will be omitted, but by no means all.  My feeling is
that the embellishments are as essential as the functions.

As one simple example, Oberon presents the keyboard as an input stream
of characters (p. 11).  Perhaps it’s an “embellishment” to deliver
keyup events as well, but without it, Tetris is substantially less
enjoyable.  (On p. 19 we find that the Lilith keyboard was connected
via RS-232, aka V24 as we find on p. 209, so perhaps it sent ASCII
characters rather than multibyte key-event sequences, thus rendering
keyup events impossible at the hardware level.  Indeed, this is
confirmed for the Ceres keyboards on p. 205.  On p. 208 we find it
used an appalling 300 bps baud rate, implying a horrifying minimum of
33 ms of keyboard latency.)

It’s interesting to note that Oberon uses the “viewers” terminology
from Cedar — as well as, at least initially, the non-overlapping,
column-oriented layout of Cedar.

It’s amusing that even in 1992 Wirth felt it necessary to explain what
the “so-called mouse” was and how it worked (p. 12), though it had
been 24 years since Engelbart’s Fall Joint Computer Conference
demo — and, moreover, 8 years since the mass-market introduction of
the Macintosh.  This naïveté perhaps explains the catastrophic
“interclick” interaction design in Oberon (p. 96, p. 375, especially
p. 386), despite the attention given to usability in, for example, the
rejection of modes and hidden state (pp. 13–14) and memorization of
abbreviations (p. 15).

I had forgotten that command texts could have textual parameters
textually following them (p. 13), parsed when you middle-clicked on
the command name.

The mention of traps and leaving global variables in an inconsistent
state (p. 13) makes me somewhat queasy.  Surely rolling back a
transaction is a better response?

The note about how much simpler it is to have an event-loop system
rather than preemptive multitasking (p. 14), while correct, seems
rather overoptimistic to me; the ostensible consequent elimination of
background computations seems like a very heavy price to pay — though
at least they made the concession to practicality of an “abort
character” to halt runaway infinite loops
(“cntl-shift-delete” — p. 208), and p. 18 explains that background
tasks such as the garbage collector do indeed exist.

The paean to the versatility of text on p. 15 seems a bit dated; it
would be nice to have _hyper_text output, and with reasonable layout
and styling at that, so that you can not only copy and paste filenames
from a directory listing into a command line somewhere, but also click
on the filename to mark it for a mass action or to pop up a menu of
available operations.

I’m wary of inheritance, which was not present in Cedar and which
Wirth endorses fervently at the bottom of p. 15.  I’ve used
inheritance extensively in C++, Python, JS, Java, and Ruby, and I’ve
come to the conclusion that inheritance was a mistake.

The explanation on p. 16 of the benefits of dynamic linking — that
each module is present only once in the “store”, by which he means
RAM — makes me think that perhaps dynamic linking’s time has come and
gone.  I’m typing this on a machine with 4 GiB of RAM.  If I have both
libjpeg 8.0.1 and libjpeg 8.0.2 loaded, that wastes 360 kB of RAM, one
eleven-thousandth of the total.  Perhaps some benefits accrue to this
flexibility that make it worth the cost?  For example, perhaps I would
like to test a new version of libjpeg and automatically compare its
output to the old version, or perhaps I would like to port my
JPEG-using programs to the new version of libjpeg one by one instead
of all at once?

Perhaps more urgently, what if I want to load a copy of libjpeg linked
with special testing functions for accessing the filesystem, rather
than the real functions?  This is very important functionality that
can easily be provided by dynamic linking, but it would be
catastrophic for other arbitrary things that wanted to call libjpeg to
inadvertently call the copy of libjpeg under test.

The total size of the core system (p. 18) is very impressive indeed:
12,277 lines of Oberon code (186 pp.) for the kernel, filesystem,
windowing system, graphics editor, device drivers, text editor,
compiler, and networking stack, plus some undetermined amount of
assembly code (4664 bytes, so presumably about 1200 instructions for
the NS32k), all compiled together to 131,800 bytes of executable code.
Of this, 4000 lines is the compiler.  The graphics system in
particular (Fonts, Viewers, and Display) total 5324 bytes,
substantially less than the 9597 bytes of text in yeso-xlib.a at the
moment, much of which has to do with interfacing to Xlib and
graphics-file libraries.

The description of viewers on p. 22 makes me think that perhaps Unix
processes might simplify some things after all — the `ViewerDesc` type
requires a `Handler` procedure for each window to be invoked with
events, while in Yeso no such thing is needed, because each window
normally has an entirely separate Unix process, and in any case its
events can be read by the client as it pleases.  (But perhaps cisco’s
travails getting sshd working on IOS are a better argument.)

On p. 23 the note about inheritance of message types is very
interesting — the idea of adding new derived message types as
subclasses of existing message types is simultaneously fascinating and
horrifying.

It’s interesting to read about a stackless “task” on p. 24.

The examples of inheritance on pp. 23–24 are basically closures — they
exist in order to allow a task or viewer handler proc (like a WndProc)
to maintain per-instance data.

The “system management tool” on p. 32 is interesting; it’s more or
less a form with clickable buttons, with the nice feature that it’s
just a piece of text, typable by the user and WYSIWYG anywhere.  (The
↑ glyph for what was described as “A reference-character ‘^’” on the
previous page is interesting — it’s from ASCII-1963, obsolete in
ASCII-1968, but still in use in Smalltalk until the 1990s or even
2000s — Wirth’s sabbatical at PARC, Smalltalk’s birthplace, may be
relevant here.)

A thought-provoking question is how far you could go with building an
editable user interface that consisted of such templates and
replacements — a popup menu replacing a menubutton and vice versa.
Perhaps when you click on one command button (or press a control key
bound in the context), it replaces the whole form it’s embedded in
with a query result, simply by textual replacement.  Some of this
could even be done with a simple text template language.  And maybe a
“reveal codes” toggle would be helpful for hiding the necessary markup
at times.

(Similar things existed [in Gypsy at PARC][Tesler] at the time; the
menu at the top of the screen had a section labeled “*Scan* for {}”
and another labeled “*Substitute* {} for {}”, where the words “Scan”
and “Substitute” were italicized to indicate that they were clickable,
and the curly braces enclosed their arguments, which were of variable
length.)

No introduction to the syntax of the language has been given before
p. 34 as far as I can tell, so the reader is left to guess that `#`
means `≠` and the semantics of the procedure-call mechanism (although
it seems to be the same as Pascal’s.)

The long sequences of statements on a single line, such as “c := b; b
:= a; a := (c MOD 509 + 1) * 127 + ORD(s[i])” are not in keeping with
my aesthetic sensibilities, but those sensibilities may be a product
of C and its assembly-language roots; certainly I wrote a lot of code
in such a style in the 1980s myself (in BASIC), and Knuth’s “TeX: The
Program” (1984) is full of lines like `else begin back_input; cur_tok
← par_token; back_input; token_type ← inserted;`, though somewhat
better typeset than the Oberon code.

(This may go some distance to explaining how the Oberon compiler is
only 4000 lines of code.)

The password-hashing setup on p. 34 is cringe-inducingly naïve.  Also,
though, I infer from the code that Oberon’s INTEGER type was 16 bits,
either at times or always, since all of its variables would fit easily
in 32 bits (19 bits I think).  See p. 258 for how it’s set on the
server and p. 260 for why.

The setup of Oberon.User (also p. 34) as ARRAY 8 OF CHAR seems
strangely primitive, given that Wirth conceived the system after heavy
use of Cedar, from which it gets its tracks and viewers.  Why didn’t
he use ropes?  Ropes don’t appear at all in Oberon.  (Perhaps Wirth
was skeptical about immutability in general, or at least when it comes
to strings; see the bletcherous inline strtok() code in Call on
p. 38.)

I’m suspecting that the “flip” in the names of FlipArrow and FlipStar
on p. 35 means “XOR”, which I suspect is the meaning of the fifth
parameter of Display.CopyPattern, given here as “2”; this could be
more explicit.  It’s somewhat horrifying to see the cursor bitmap
sizes hardcoded into the bounding code like this; it suggests that the
arrow and the star were the only two sprites in Oberon, so Gutknecht
(or Wirth) didn’t feel that factoring out a generic sprite-bounding
system was worthwhile.  (The DrawCursor function immediately afterward
may be the one that’s actually used, though; perhaps the Flip variants
were obsolete?)  (Perhaps not; on p. 40 they’re assigned to the Fade
and Draw methods of the Arrow and Star markets, reinforcing the XOR
hypothesis.)  (Further explanation of cursor management is given on
p. 59, and on p. 60 we have, “markers are usually painted
non-destructively in inverse-video mode.”, which I think means using
the XOR hack; p. 61 defines Display.invert, explained as the “mode” “s
XOR d”, as “2”, and indeed the fifth parameter of CopyPattern is
“mode”.  Whew.)

On p. 36 we see HandleFiller, which handles events in parts of the
screen containing no windows (“viewers”).  The IF M IS InputMsg THEN
WITH M: InputMsg DO stuff is a bit tiresome by contrast with ML.  (I’m
increasingly of the opinion that garbage-collected languages should be
almost purely functional.  Imperative code’s advantages, such as they
are, are vitiated by GC — maybe there’s a local optimum near Golang.)
The Display.FrameMsg argument is explained on p. 48.

On pp. 36–37 we see some clearly duplicated code, suggesting that the
“dead code” hypothesis for FlipArrow and FlipStar is plausible:
OpenDisplay should call OpenTrack twice, but instead duplicates its
contents.  Perhaps at some point in the past OpenTrack did something
that was undesirable in OpenDisplay.

On p. 38 we see some examples of code with added reading complexity
due to having no early exits; here Install wants to avoid adding a
task to the task list if it’s already there:

    t := PrevTask;
    WHILE (t.next # PrevTask) & (t.next # T) DO t := t.next END;
    IF t.next = PrevTask THEN T.next := PrevTask; t.next := T END

This translates to C as:

    t = PrevTask;
    while (t->next != prev_task && t->next != T) t = t->next;
    if (t->next == prev_task) {
        T->next = prev_task;
        t->next = T;
    }

But I think it would be more natural to write it with an early exit,
avoiding the redundant test:

    TaskDesc *t = prev_task;
    for (t = prev_task; t->next != prev_task; t = t->next) {
        if (t->next == T) return;
    }
    T->next = prev_task;
    t->next = T;

(I wouldn’t call my variables `t` and `T`, though.)

We also see what the authors were talking about when they said that
GetSelection was implemented by broadcasting a message to all viewers
on p. 38.  After the Viewers.Broadcast call, GetSelection fishes the
information about the selection out of the fields of the
SelectionMsg — presumably one or more of the viewers mutated it,
perhaps conditionally based on the timestamp (which would explain the
otherwise strange comments on p. 29 about the definition of the
current selection, and indeed the existence of the timestamp field, as
well as its initialization here to -1.)

On p. 39 we have some hints about the character encoding, as the main
loop has some random code wedged into it to compensate for the
difference between the keyboard’s character encoding and that used
elsewhere in the system.  Assuming this PDF is faithful, both
encodings are unknown to me; one has € at 0x81 and the other has it at
0x80.

On p. 40 we have the initial construction of the circular linked list
of tasks, starting with just the garbage collector.  A separate list
header structure would have almost required a special case in the task
list mutations (the Install and Remove procedures on p. 38 and the
task-unlinking case in the main loop near the top of p. 40) because
(if Oberon is like Pascal) you can’t take a pointer to a struct
field — although you can pass it as a VAR parameter, and maybe that
would have been adequate.

It’s somewhat jarring to find Min (for INTEGERs) in module Oberon on
p. 34 and Max (for LONGINTs) in module System on p. 40.

On p. 41 we find the System.SetUser command, which it turns out
separates the username from the password with a “/”: “WHILE (ch #
"/")”.  (This was actually suggested by the instruction “{ type
user/password }” on p. 31.)  Interestingly, this constant uses the
same doublequotes used for strings, suggesting that in Oberon (as in
Python, but very much not as in C or Pascal) a character is a string
of length 1.  Also we find that the username’s length limit is
actually 7 characters, not 8, because of the terminating 0X.

We also see the implementation of the rules for input parsing
explained on p. 31: System.SetFont (also on p. 41) has a special case
for “^”, as do SetColor, SetOffset, etc., all implemented with
separate calls to Oberon.GetSelection.  But they’re missing the “@”
cases (although perhaps they wouldn’t apply.)  At least they’re all
using the same Texts.OpenScanner call to tokenize the parameter text.

A thing conspicuously missing in these user commands is error
handling.  If the specified font name doesn’t exist or isn’t supplied,
there is apparently no feedback to the user at all that a command was
invoked but merely failed, much less why it failed and how to proceed.
Omitting error handling is indeed a very effective way to reduce the
amount of code in your system, but it may not be a good tradeoff.

On p. 42 we see the bitfield datetime system in its full glory.  I’m
glad I don’t have to do date arithmetic on Oberon.

On p. 44 we have the save-unders problem that accounts for so much of
the complexity of both X11 and the Blit: “Any efficient management of
overlapping viewers must rely on a subordinate management of
(arbitrary) sub-rectangles and on sophisticated clipping
operations. This is so because partially overlapped viewers must be
partially restored under control of the viewer manager. For example,
in Figure 4.1(b), rectangles a, b, and c of viewer A ought to be
restored individually after closing of viewer B,” although A and B are
reversed from the diagram, in which A is on top of B.  The Blit did
indeed do this; Microsoft Windows opted instead to dispatch paint
messages to the exposed viewer.

The scrollbars on p. 44 would seem to owe a lot to MacOS, although
perhaps I’m mistaken and PARC had nearly identical-looking scrollbars.
The sans-serif code font on p. 44 and vertical italic email font on
p. 45 (perhaps they are in fact the same font?) look like they come
from Smalltalk.

The custom one-click shortcuts to print on particular printers or set
particular fonts in the editor on p. 44 are particularly appealing.

On p. 48, the Oberon variant of MVC is most amusing: any time any
document changes, all viewers are notified so that they can update if
necessary, thus avoiding the necessity to register and deregister
views of a model.  This is a step toward the usual ImGui approach of
repainting all viewers on every screen frame.  (But see p. 79 for
where this falls down, p. 98 for the unification, and p. 385 for a
redundant re-explanation.)

We also see that Oberon has an X11-like hierarchy of windows, though
it calls them “frames”.  Oberon windows are pretty lightweight,
though; they contain seven words (presumably 28 bytes on the NS32032
they were designing for), so you can have tens of thousands of them if
you like.  However, the main purpose of this hierarchy in practice
seems to be the pairing of inverse-video menu texts with contents
panes as a single object, since the other use (vertical tracks of
viewers) doesn’t seem to really need handlers or really anything other
than a global list of widths.

On p. 49 we see an email from “Griesemer” on “30.10.91”.  Could that
be the Golang Griesemer?  Yes, Golang Griesemer got his Ph.D. at ETHZ
under Wirth and Mössenböck in 1993 on a vector version of Oberon for
the Cray Y-MP, called Oberon-V.

On p. 50 we are introduced to the “logical display area”.  I wonder
how decoupled from displays it ended up being in practice; the XOR
hack mentioned earlier suggests not much.

On p. 51 we are faced with yet another definition of OpenTrack, or the
declaration of one at any rate, this time in module Viewers.  What
happened to the one on p. 37?

On pp. 54–55 we have a small contradiction: “according to the
principle of information hiding an internal data structure is fully
private to the containing module and accessible through the module’s
procedural interface only,” yet, “Although there is no language
facility to enforce it, the variable _state_ is to be treated as
read-only by every module other than _Viewers_.”  I guess once you get
a pointer into the internal data structure you can navigate it as you
please!

On p. 56 we have an interesting viewpoint on object-orientation:

> Message handlers in Oberon are implemented in the form of “procedure
> variables” that obviously must be initialized properly at object
> creation time. In other words, some concrete behavior must
> explicitly be bound to each object, where different instances of the
> same object type could potentially have a different behavior and/ or
> the same instance could change its behavior during its lifetime. Our
> object model is therefore *instance-centered*.

The procedure variables themselves, though, at least in the cases
we’ve seen so far, handle all the messages directed to a given viewer
or other frame, not just one.  So they aren’t the equivalent of a C++
virtual method, but rather of a C++ vtable.  This is explained in
more detail on pp. 379–81.

(This is in addition to the parallel mechanism for identifying record
subtypes at runtime.)

Pascal procedure variables could only be passed down the stack, not
stored in records, with the consequence that this style of programming
was impossible in Pascal.  The reason was that Pascal had nested
procedures with block scope, but no garbage collection.  The same
reason explains why Pascal var parameters — which are pointers that
may point inside of stack frames or records, unlike Pascal’s heap
pointers — can only be passed down the stack, rather than stored in
data structures.  This restriction would seem to be unnecessary in
Oberon.

I’m not a big fan of the four-deep nested IFs at the bottom of p. 56.

On p. 57 we see an observation which is in a sense very trivial from
the point of view of the Actors model, but quite a mind-bomb for the
Pascal crowd:

> The essential point here is the use of new *outgoing* messages in
> order to process a given *incoming* message. We can regard message
> processing as a transformation that maps incoming messages into a
> set of outgoing messages, with possible side-effects.

(That’s all there is to the Actors model, really, except to view all
of computation in that way.)

On p. 59 we see why XOR-drawn cursors flicker when something else is
being drawn without double-buffering.

On p. 61 the drawing API is explained.  It lacks the ability to copy a
block of pixel data to or from an offscreen buffer; cursors (and
fonts, p. 62) are drawn using CopyPattern, which takes a
foreground-color parameter and a one-bit-deep (p. 62) Pattern.

On p. 62 we collide with the Oberon language’s lack of slices and
consequent weakness in dealing with variable-size bitmap data.

On p. 63 we seem to be considering double-buffered
Xinerama-style-unified displays of varying color depths;
double-buffering is somewhat surprising for the 1984–8 timeframe when
they were building the Oberon system — the Macintosh, the CGA, and the
EGA didn’t have enough RAM to double-buffer in popular modes, and
X-Windows (1984, X11 in 1985) isn’t double-buffered — it hurt
responsiveness.  Working multi-depth Xinerama is surprising even
today.

For now I’m going to skip over the complete implementation on
pp. 67–77.

On p. 78, where they’re starting to talk about texts, they explicitly
call out Cedar’s influence:

> Motivated by our positive experience with integrated text in the
> _Cedar_ system [Teitelman] we decided to provide a central text
> management in Oberon at a sufficiently low system level.

On p. 79, they say, “It is important not to confuse this type with the
far less powerful type *string* as it is often supported by advanced
programming languages.”  Of course we’ve already seen a fair bit of
NUL-terminated string handling in the previous chapters; and Oberon’s
Text type is mutable, preventing it from being used for many of the
things Cedar used ropes for.  Oberon texts have fonts, colors, and
“vertical offsets” (which seems to mean superscript or subscript; see
p. 102 for an illustration), making them essentially quite graphical
objects.  They have no implicit line breaks, so they are intrinsically
formatted for a particular line width.  However, texts to be displayed
in standard text viewers cannot have multiple font sizes!  See
pp. 100–101 for this disheartening development.

On p. 79 we also see the weakness of their minimalist MVC
implementation explained on p. 48: there’s an additional observer
interface to be notified of changes to Texts — though in this case
it’s so broken it only supports notifying a single observer.  (But see
p. 98.)

On p. 80, we see that their text handling is plagued by the same kind
of unnecessary multiplication of interfaces as their pixel
handling — instead of having a single string type, they have three or
more — ARRAYs OF CHAR, Texts (which may have properties or “looks”),
and now Buffers.

On pp. 80–81 we are introduced to the Reader type, which, like an
Emacs marker, points to a place in a Text without being merely a
number.  However, I suspect that Reader doesn’t have the virtue of
Emacs markers: that it moves with the buffer contents when something
is inserted earlier in the buffer.  We shall see.  Certainly there
seems to be no possibility of passing Readers instead of integers as
positions to procedures that take text-position arguments.  (On p. 87
we see that Readers contain a reference into the piece-chain data
structure of Texts that would enable them to survive mutations in
other pieces undisturbed.)

I am distinctly unimpressed with the bug-prone Scanner sum type, with
its 5 different value fields and a sixth tag field to tell which is
active.

On p. 82 we have this absolutely fascinating note:

> Typically, readers and scanners are… of a *transient* nature, … This
> fact manifests itself by the absence of any possibility to reference
> readers and scanners by pointers.

This is a very surprising note!  It implies that in Oberon you can’t
declare a POINTER TO Scanner type whenever you please; perhaps only
their own module is permitted to declare such a type.  Presumably,
though, you can embed them in other records, and reference those other
records with pointers, if you want to, so I am at a loss as to what
the benefit of this limitation might be.

Lower on p. 82 we have Oberon’s text formatting capabilities, such as
they are; they’re similar to TeX or Smalltalk in that the favored
approach to produce an output of ten tokens (strings, integers, and
decimal fractions, say) is to invoke a sequence of ten procedures,
passing the same argument.

On p. 83 we find that they have chosen to represent Texts with
Bravo-style piece chains.

On p. 90 we have the curious feature that does impedance-matching
between the piece-chain structure and keyboard input:

> And finally, typed characters that are supposed to be inserted into
> a text need to be stored on a continuously growing file, the
> so-called *keyboard file*.

This doesn’t really cover text generated as command output, but I
suppose we could have output files for all commands, too.

The keyboard file could be useful for other purposes, too; for
example, you might want to look at it, or even have the end of it
continuously displayed for a screencast.

We also see the usual conceit of totalizing systems like Microsoft
Word: plain ASCII text files are accepted, as input files, but only
“for compatibility reasons”.  Ugh.

The discussion of file page immutability on p. 90 is also
interesting — the piece-chain data structure they’re using shares with
ropes the feature of being able to include arbitrary amounts of file
data without reading it from disk until needed, so for it to be
completely safe, it is necessary for that file data not to be modified
in the meantime.  (Perhaps a change notification scheme would work
under some circumstances, but Oberon seems to have no such scheme.)
This is expressed on p. 91 as follows:

> Once a file page is allocated it must not be reused (until system
> restart).

But it’s not talking just about reuse *for another file*, but also
about reuse for a different version of the same file.

This is an interesting desideratum for filesystems: the ability to
retain immutable on-disk snapshots of particular files.  The “system
restart” backdoor might be thought clearly unacceptable nowadays,
requiring as it does regular reboots to prevent the filesystem from
getting full.  (This is elaborated on p. 163, where file pages are
called “sectors”.)

It’s also interesting in that, although Oberon’s Text isn’t immutable
as Cedar’s ROPE is, its implementation depends on immutability — but
of disk files.  (But note that disk files aren’t immutable; see
p. 164!  So this can fail.)  In a way, this seems perverse — it’s
depending on a more expensive kind of immutability, but doesn’t fully
deliver the decoupling benefits of Cedar’s ROPE, in that you can’t
just hand out Text references willy-nilly — you’ll get aliasing bugs
where something you handed it to goes and mutates it later.  But it
seems like making a copy of a Text might often be a sufficiently cheap
operation as to make this forgivable, since only a small number of
Pieces need to be copied.  (The association of “looks” with Piece
objects will multiply the number for fancy documents.)

On p. 98 we have the link between the Text change notification
mechanism (p. 79) and the Viewer change notification mechanism
(p. 48): changing a Text being displayed in a Viewer invokes
Viewers.Broadcast with an UpdateMsg (with the typically painful and
repetitive Pascal/Oberon record initialization syntax.)  I suppose
this means that you can’t share a Text between a text frame and
another kind of non-viewer user that wants to be notified if it
changes, but sharing it between multiple text frames is no problem.

On p. 99 we see concern about flickering, but manifested by using
bitblt for scrolling, rather than double-buffering a screen update.
This is an example of extra complexity introduced by optimizations
that were necessary in 1988 on a 1-MIPS machine that are no longer
relevant.

On p. 100 we see the rather dismaying pronouncements:

> 1.) For a given text frame the distance between lines is constant.  
> 2.) There are no implicit line breaks.

This means that there is no way to get a title in a larger font to
take up more vertical space.  This is justified by the desire to
display text in a single pass, but is that really worth damaging the
formatting quality of the text so severely?

My propfont.c spike does paragraph filling (implicit line breaks) with
a proportional font, though not variable line spacing, in grayscale at
22 megabytes of text per second on one core of my 1.6GHz laptop.
Assuming 1.5 instructions per cycle, this is about 109 instructions
per letter.  On a 1-MIPS workstation, in a 15-millisecond screen
frame, this could manage to format about 15 kilobytes of text.

On p. 101 we find that we can’t even get a title in a larger font at
all:

> line spacing is fixed for every text frame. Therefore, different
> styles of a base font are possible within a given text frame while
> different sizes are not.

Watching [Larry Tesler’s 2017 demo of Gypsy from 1981][Tesler] I see
that Gypsy and Bravo didn’t have different sizes or different
typefaces either, at least a couple of years earlier, except for
italic and bold (and underlined and inverse-video) variants of the
same base font.

[Tesler]: https://youtu.be/2Z43y94Dfzk

On p. 102 we see, for the first time I’ve noticed, that Oberon’s
Y-coordinates increase upward rather than downward.  Also, its font
system purports to support hinted outline fonts, but on p. 104 we see
that this is not the case; it only supports raster fonts.

We also see another of the lamentable COBOL-style arbitrary
limitations on string sizes: font names are 32 characters long.

On p. 104 we see that in the “ultimately stable” font file format, we
have a single-byte enumerated value for the font family (“*Times
Roman*, *Syntax*, etc.”)  This seems like a choice that is almost
guaranteed to produce incompatibility; since more than 256 font
families exist in the world, someone must maintain a registry of font
family identifying bytes, which will need new families added to it
from time to time, both producing the chance of incompatibility (if
two different installations of Oberon start using the same identifier
for different fonts) and inflexibility (since you cannot simply add a
new font file to your Oberon installation, but must also add the
family to the family registry.)

(Of course, the continuous and implicit conflation of “ASCII” with
“text” seems quaint in 2019.)

The font file format has a couple of other drawbacks:

1. It supports raster fonts only, and apparently monochrome ones
   without antialiasing at that.
2. There is no provision made for output device resolution: the units
   of “height” are unspecified.  (On p. 63 we saw that Oberon output
   devices supposedly do know their physical height.)  This presumably
   means that they are pixels, so you might use a height-10 font on a
   standard 75-dpi screen and a height-30 font on a 300-dpi printer;
   this precludes the kind of adaptation normally needed to preserve
   readability at small sizes.

The printing graphics model on p. 105 seems rather impoverished
compared to PostScript, and presumably the PARC language JaM it
derived from; like X11, for example, it provides only unrotated text,
and seemingly no facilities for clipping or even color — its
primitives completely lack composability!  It’s also rather depressing
that (like X11 but unlike GDI and Quartz) they chose a completely
different imaging model for printing and onscreen drawing.

I am skipping for the time being past pp. 105–143, which contain
several source-code modules.

On p. 144 we have the Oberon philosophy on dynamic linking, namely,
that you should make your linker fast enough that you are not tempted
to link things statically.  This philosophy does more or less prevail
in modern Unix and Microsoft Windows, but it does have a certain
amount of cost in the Unix context, where the loading of a compiled
program is conflated with the initiation of a process.  `ldd
/usr/bin/mate-terminal` on my laptop, which merely runs the dynamic
linker to link the 58 dynamic libraries into mate-terminal and prints
the results, takes about 30 milliseconds, which is a human-detectable
period of time; that’s on a CPU core that runs about 2.4 billion
instructions per second.  Valgrind reports that it takes about
7 million instructions in the last-spawned child process.  So on a
1-MIPS workstation this would take about 7 seconds, or about 72
seconds if you believe the 2.4-billion number.

Probably, though, you can use jumps through program linkage tables
(called “link tables” here on p. 144) to reduce this cost if it
becomes significant; the cost of linking then diminishes to merely a
merge of the tables of subroutines in all the libraries; as explained
on p. 145, this is the approach Oberon uses.  PC-relative addressing
on modern processors eliminates the need to use these tables (or a
separate library-base-pointer register) for intra-module references.
(On p. 147 we see that apparently the NS32k’s BSR instruction is
PC-relative.)

Indirection through such a table does impose an extra cost on each
static inter-module subroutine call (though not necessarily dynamic
calls through function pointers.)

On p. 145 we are faced with the question of numbering procedures.  How
does the linker avoid trying to load module A compiled against version
1 of module B, attempting to link it to version 2 of module B with a
different procedure numbering?  Because the page says, “Procedure
names are not needed, as they have been transformed by the compiler
into numbers unique for each module.”

On p. 146 we see that Oberon uses two separate registers for
intra-library relocation, rather than ELF’s single register (which is
%ebx on i386 IIRC).

We also encounter something claimed to be microcode; I’m not clear on
whether this is the actual microcode for the NS32032 CXP and RXP
instructions (it seems to be; the instruction opcodes
are given on p. 355), or some kind of Oberon-specific
portable assembly.

On p. 156 we encounter the notion of a “rider”, which is to say, a
file cursor; Michael Franz gives this as one of the great advances in
Oberon over other systems, but I don’t understand what the difference
between a Rider and a Unix file descriptor is, except that in Oberon
you need to first call Old (or New) to open the file and then Set to
place a Rider, rather than just calling open().

On p. 157 we encounter the presumption of filenames:

> A file system must not only provide the concept of a sequence with
> its accessing mechanism, but also a registry. This implies that
> files be identified, that they can be given a name by which they are
> registered and retrieved. The registry or collection of registered
> names is called the file system’s *directory*.

What do we get if we question this?  We’ve already seen that Oberon
does question it somewhat — previously written file pages can continue
to be referenced by Texts even when they are obsolete — but what if
our files were anonymous?  Perhaps we could include references to them
in other files (in a way that is explicit to the filesystem), then run
a garbage collector.

It seems that all Oberon files are open read-write; even all riders
are read-write.

On p. 159 we encounter the horrifying suspicion that perhaps Oberon
files require a function call and return for every byte read — and an
inter-module call and return, at that.  But p. 157 allays our
suspicion — there is a ReadBytes call that takes an (unsafe)
variable-length array.  This is elaborated on p. 163, which gives the
measured speedup on the Ceres-3 as 18× (though still only 2.5
megabytes per second — to RAM! — which seems painfully slow.  It’s
about 7000 times slower than my current laptop’s in-cache RAM access
of 17 gigabytes per second, according to lmbench’s bcopy benchmark.)

On p. 163 we encounter the first clue that Oberon in fact used memory
protection after all, though perhaps not virtual memory:

> In this table, every sector is represented by a single bit
> indicating whether or not the sector is allocated. Although
> conceptually belonging to the file system, this table resides within
> module Kernel, because for safety reasons it is write-protected in
> user mode.

(But see on p. 194 that Ceres-3 had no MMU; p. 197 goes into the
details of the memory mapping.)

Also we find that the Oberon startup routine involves scanning the
entire filesystem for free blocks, like jffs, to build the in-RAM
sector reservation table; this seems that it would not scale well to
modern disks with billions of sectors, but perhaps it depends on the
locality of the file directory.  However, as in Unix, the block
pointers (“sector table”) and indirect pointers (“extension table”) in
Oberon are stored in the inode (“file header”), so the locality can’t
be very good.  On p. 190 we are told, “[T]he initialization of the
sector reservation table clearly dominates the start-up time of the
computer.  For a file system with 10'000 files it takes [on] the order
of 15s to record all files.”

(The whole sector GC thing seems rather bletcherous to me, even for
1984.)

On p. 164 there is a clue as to why Franz thought riders were so
awesome: in Oberon, disk buffers are associated with a particular
file, rather than with the disk as in typical Unix systems.  Clearly
associating buffers with a particular file descriptor would lead to
inconsistencies (failure to Read Your Writes, among others).

The description of the buffer semantics here make it clear that the
immutability property required by Texts on p. 90 is not in fact
provided; you can change the contents of a Text by rewriting parts of
its underlying disk file, though not by writing an entire new version
of the file and then invoking Register to update it.

On p. 174 we see that Oberon’s Register includes an fsync() (Unbuffer)
to avoid losing data.  My recent experiences with recalcitrant USB
drives make me wonder if some kind of limit to dirty in-memory data is
needed to guarantee responsiveness in cases like this — Oberon’s four
buffers (4KB) per file, for example, ensures that this Unbuffer call
won’t take that long.

Also on p. 174 we see that they didn’t know about weak pointers, so
they hacked the garbage collector’s root set to compensate:

> there exists a pitfall that is easily overlooked: all opened files
> would permanently remain accessible via root, and the garbage
> collector could never remove a file descriptor nor its associated
> buffers. This would be unacceptable. We have found no better
> solution to this problem than to design the garbage collector such
> that it excludes this list from its mark phase.

On pp. 174–175 we see that they use a 24-way B-tree to map file
pathnames (capped at 32 characters) to sector addresses, where their
inodes are stored, though it’s defined naïvely without hysteresis and
can thus thrash splitting and unsplitting the root when oscillating
about a crucial number of entries.  This choice is justified on
simplicity and efficiency grounds on p. 189 and contrasted with Unix’s
hierarchical filesystem, but the simplicity grounds make me suspect
that the authors never read the Unix filesystem code, which used a
linear search through an unordered directory at the time, and indeed
in many later implementations.

It’s unfortunate that the B-tree code wasn’t generalized and exported
to provide a general-purpose ISAM facility.

On p. 176 we see that FileDir.Enumerate is in the “non-public” API of
FilesDir (the reason being given on p. 183); also, I note that it
takes a callback but no userdata.  Does Oberon support nested
procedures with lexical scope, as Pascal did?  The notes about BSR on
p. 147 didn’t suggest that the regular procedure-call sequence
involves passing a context pointer, as nested procedures normally
require (except when circumvented with GCC’s stack-trampoline hack).

On p. 192 we find an RT-11-style/VMS-style command-line switch
“/date”!  For the Directory command.

On p. 194 we find some explanation for the earlier ambiguity about
memory protection: the Ceres-3 has no MMU!

On p. 195 the memory maps confused me by having 0 at the top and
addresses increasing downwards; it led me to wonder whether the
Ceres-[123] all had stacks that grew *upwards*, which they don’t, as
we can see from the “microcode” on pp. 146–7.

On p. 198 we find deep skepticism about the usefulness of MMUs: “a
dispensible [sic] overkill for single-user workstations.”  Yeah, maybe
if all your software is written in OCaml.  Although I suppose the
Macintosh was pretty useful without an MMU from 1984 until MacOS X
(1999?).

On p. 199 we are introduced to the garbage collector; surprisingly,
they mention reference counting (though giving the algorithm
incorrectly) and the mark-and-sweep scheme they use, but not copying
collectors.  Oberon uses a non-incremental stop-the-world
mark-and-sweep collector using pointer reversal.

On p. 202 we are introduced to the heap object format, which has a
4-byte header (ick).  Maybe it was hard to do better than that in
1984, although BIBOP kind of did.  BIBOP may be easier if you have an
MMU, but I don’t think it really needs one.

On p. 207 we have the entirely unnecessary SetMouseLimits interface,
which has no equivalent in PS/2, USB, or evdev mouse protocols, but
the Oberon mouse driver reports absolute rather than relative X and Y.
Even if you wanted to limit the memory needed to buffer mouse events,
you could buffer a ΔX and ΔY!  This unconventional choice of border
behavior also implies a lack of awareness of the Fitts’s-Law-driven
design of 1984 Macintosh menus:

> The position “wraps around” in both the horizontal and vertical
> directions.

To be fair, though, nobody had written about this outside of Apple at
the time.

On p. 209 we have “the module’s initialization sequence”, which I
suppose is the block of code at the end of the module; I hadn’t
realized this was run when the module was loaded, but of course such a
thing is urgently necessary in a Pascal-family language that doesn’t
permit you to initialize values in their declaration.  In this case,
it’s also being used to install interrupt handlers.

We also see the module V24, for accessing the serial port; its
interface is entirely incompatible with those of file access, of
handling keyboard events, and of access to Text objects.

On p. 210 I finally realized that “0FFFFC000H” is a LONGINT while
“30X” is a CHAR.  (This is explained in the scanner on p. 307.)

The serial-port driver on p. 210 is quite compact for a device driver.
Its use of a CPU delay loop in Break (p. 211) despite being a driver
for a chip with a sufficiently accurate real-time timer on it seems
suboptimal.  This goes unremarked here, but a similar (but more
justifiable) delay loop on p. 216 merits the comment, “This is rather
unfortunate.”

On p. 211 we have a description of an RS-485 network.  They claim to
have gotten 230 kbps, close to contemporary Arcnet’s 300-kbps
performance.  It’s strange that they claim that clock accuracy limits
packet length, though, since they’re using SDLC bitstuffing (and in
fact the whole SDLC protocol, including its 256-station addressing
limit) to ensure adequate transition frequencies to maintain CDR.  (On
p. 222 we find that the length limit is 512 bytes.)

On p. 216 we have the account of SDLC’s alternative to CSMA/CD, whose
code is near the top of SendPacket on p. 214:

> Before sending a packet, it must be verified that the line is free
> by testing the so-called hunt bit. If the line is busy, the line is
> polled again after a delay. The delay is influenced by the station's
> address, causing all stations to have a slightly different
> delay. Actual collisions can only be detected by the receiver
> through the CRC-check at the end of the packet.

What’s not mentioned is that this whole procedure, including the retry
delay, blocks the entire machine; presumably this will always happen
if the line is faulted in a certain way.  There is no retry limit.

During the packet transmission the driver disables interrupts in order
to be able to meet the SDLC chip’s timing constraints, like the old
Linux PIO disk driver.  This seems like it could detectably interfere
with interactive responsiveness: 512 bytes is 4096 bits, which is
almost 18 ms at 230 kbps, and it’s possible that we might have to wait
for several packets from other senders to finish passing before we can
send our own.

I haven’t read the SCSI driver on pp. 218–220, but I’m pleasantly
impressed that it’s only two pages of code.

On p. 222 we find the description of the TFTP-like file transfer
protocol; its lack of windowing might slow down file transfer (since
the ACK packet will be delayed until whatever user interface task has
the receiving processor busy is done) but I’m not sure that the SCC
driver described on pp. 211–216 can buffer multiple packets anyway.

The lack of cryptography in the user authentication p. 222 is entirely
unremarkable in the 1984–92 context; although it is of course
unacceptable nowadays, some web hosts still use unencrypted FTP.

It’s amusing that the file transfer protocol includes an instant
message protocol (though no group chat).  This becomes less amusing
when we reach the end of Chapter 10 on p. 230 and realize that the
file transfer protocol is the only application protocol supported by
their network!  (Well, the dedicated server software in Chapter 11
also includes an email protocol and a printing protocol, which the
workstations have the client code for.)  This is somewhat
disappointing in the 1984–88 context they were designing the code in,
which also saw network-transparent windowing in W and X, telephony
over Ethernet, and the birth of Novell, and was 16 years after
Engelbart’s 1968 demo in which he demonstrated screen-sharing of a
windowed environment over a long-distance network.

They describe ARP on pp. 222–3, but they’re ARPing for a person’s
initials rather than an IP address.

On p. 231 we begin the description of the dedicated server, and it’s
astonishing to realize that they don’t have a fileserver in the normal
sense — a networked facility that appears as a filesystem, just like
local disk filesystems, but perhaps supports locking or something,
which was the primary service provided in Novell and NFS/NIS networks
in the 1980s and 1990s.  Wirth had experience with such a
system — Cedar’s FS was done that way, and its designers report that
they only allowed local disks reluctantly as a concession to user
demands.  Perhaps he didn’t think it was a good idea?

They say their server is a Ceres-1 with two megs of RAM (half being
the printer’s framebuffer) and a 1-MIPS processor on p. 259.

It’s amusing that the primary interface between servers is a message
queue, though one substantially simpler than AMQP.

On p. 237 we are explained that an Oberon mailbox (for email, not some
kind of message queue thing) is structurally restricted to 64
kibibytes and 30 messages; the format is a sort of compound-file-like
filesystem-within-a-file with its own block-based free map and
directory.  I have to say that I think the Berkeley mbox format is
both simpler and less limited (though surely less efficient; providing
a mailbox directory requires reading the entire file).  (Sendmail was
a nightmare of complexity compared to the simpler mail server
presented here.)  Maybe they should have fixed their filesystem so it
didn’t allocate an entire kilobyte to every file, so they could have
just used a file per message.  It appears also that it’s possible for
the mailbox file to be so fragmented that a new message won’t fit.
(Confirmed on p. 245.)

You could imagine justifying such a complex mailbox file format if it
were generalized to support arbitrary tables.  For some reason,
mailbox formats seem to be an attractive nuisance for ingenious people
to overcomplicate, Mork being perhaps the most notorious example but
far from the only one.

“Franz” (presumably Michael) appears on p. 238 in an example mail
message, as do “Templ” and “Mueller”.

On p. 238, we see that for no particularly good reason the mail access
protocol seems to be binary: 10H for ACK, 25H for NAK, 26H for NPR,
24H for NRQ, and so on.  These are the values of the field
SCC.Header.typ.

On p. 252 we see the use of a temporary file (one not registered in
the filesystem directory) as a buffer for data:

> it is almost the same as that for handling requests to receive a
> file. But instead of registering the received file, the file is
> inserted into _Core.PrintQueue_.

This is the same mechanism I’m planning to use to deliver buffers of
pixel data to the Wercam server on Linux.

On p. 253 we see the printer rasterizing operations.  (Before
PostScript, all raster printers were WinPrinters.)  The midpoint
circle algorithm makes an appearance (as it does again on
pp. 423–424), though unfortunately the ellipse procedure is omitted.

On p. 258 we see that the cringe-inducing password hash from p. 34 is
actually password-equivalent; it has a cringe-inducing justification
on p. 260, which also explains that in order to protect the user
database from unauthorized access, it’s stored outside the filesystem,
since the filesystem has no protection.  Yet on p. 265, we read, “the
impossibility of activating users’ programs on the server station
significantly reduces the possibilities for inflicting damage from the
exterior.”  But presumably the server stores its software modules in
the filesystem for use during boot?

On p. 287 we have RT-11-style command-line switches again (as on
p. 192), and specifically they are to disable index and type checks,
suggesting that these were major performance bottlenecks at one time.
We also see the Algol-68-like expression “the mode of the object”,
meaning its type.

On p. 288 we see Figure 12.6, the call graph of the Oberon recursive-
descent parser, which doubles as a summary of the Oberon grammar.

On p. 289 we finally discover the meaning of the suffixed asterisk on
many procedure names at their definition: it indicates that they are
to be compiled in such a way that they can be called from another
module, so they return with an RXP instruction rather than RET.  This
implies that even intramodule calls of these procedures must use the
slower CXPD; a trampoline function could have been used to avoid this.

In the scanner or tokenizer (module OCS) on p. 307 we have yet another
of the tiresome lists of numbered constants, this time in the form of
a table of token types: number, NIL, string, ident, `;`, and so forth.
In Lisp or Cedar you would use atoms (symbols) for this, in modern C
you could use an enum, and in ML you would use a sum type.  A comment
seems like a distinctly poorer form for this information, but I
suppose it has the advantage that, being a comment, it doesn’t count
against the compiler’s 4000-line footprint.

The code for OCS is on pp. 307–312.

The hash function described on p. 307 (embedded in the Identifier
procedure on p. 308) is very poor, particularly considering that it
requires a division by 43 after every identifier character.

On p. 308 we see another peculiar feature of Oberon’s grammar: logical
AND is written as `&`, while logical OR is written as `OR`, and _binds
more tightly than AND_, unless there’s an error in the code to scan to
the end of the identifier.

It’s interesting that Texts has a Read procedure that produces a CHAR
rather than a CHAR-with-looks.

Given the simplicity of the compiler as a whole, it seems inescapable
that its chief bottleneck must have been this scanner (though the book
does not, as far as I can tell, mention a profiler, and even the
debugger on p. 368 seems very limited).  On that basis it may seem
quite surprising that they chose to make a full intermodule function
call for every input character; there are 41 callsites for Texts.Read
in OCS by my count.  An intra-module function call might have been a
bit better — both intramodule and intramodule calls had hardware
instructions, but I don’t know what their timings might have
been — but really you’d like to use a piece of code like the following:

    IF bufPtr = bufLen THEN refillBuffer END;
    ...buf[bufPtr]...; bufPtr := bufPtr + 1

However, you really don’t want to put that in the source code itself
in 41 places, and Oberon doesn’t have a C-like preprocessor, a
Lisp-like macro system, or a compiler capable of inlining even an
intramodule function call, much less an intermodule function call.

On the gripping hand, the dedicated server in Chapter 11 (p. 231 et
seq.) was of their first Ceres-1 generation of workstations and had
two megabytes of RAM.  The largest module in the system was OCE at 972
lines of code (see p. 18; OCS is listed there as 314 lines, matching
well with its 6-page length here).  Perhaps 972 lines of code might
involve another 972 lines of comments, averaging 60 characters per
line, for a total of 117 kilobytes.  Reading such a source module
entirely into RAM before beginning the scanning process would have
used only 6% of the workstation’s memory, and would have avoided the
problem of file access during tokenization entirely.  (Although
`*bufp++` is considerably wordier in Oberon than in C.)

On p. 312 we see the initialization of the keyword hash table:

    BEGIN i := KW;
        WHILE i > 0 DO
            DEC(i); keyTab[i].symb := 0; keyTab[i].alt := 0
        END ;

One is forced to wonder how much code could have been eliminated from
Oberon by zeroizing module variables, as C does, or all uninitialized
variables, as Java and Golang do.

On p. 325 we have the following extremely dubious statement:

> It is the goal of a good compiler to make use of all addressing
> modes offered by the computer, thereby avoiding the emission of
> unnecessary instructions for address computation.

Presumably the intent of avoiding unnecessary instructions is either to
make the code run faster, to reduce code size, or nowadays to use less
energy, but using more addressing modes is not guaranteed to move you
toward any of these goals — not in 1984 with microcoded CISCs, not in
1988 with nascent RISC, and certainly not in 2019 with superscalar
micro-op-based CPUs.

On p. 330 we see that the author is not American; a procedure is named
AssReal.

On p. 345 we find the amusing detail that the NS32k memory block move
instruction is called MOVSB, just like the 8088 (though there it’s not
really a block move without the REP prefix: REP MOVSB).

On p. 355 we see the full Nominal Semidestructor Thirty Two Million
CISC instruction set.  Sometimes the failure of this chip in the
market has been attributed to poor compiler quality: on paper it was
just as good as a 68000, but in practice it performed about 25% worse
with the vendor’s C compiler.  It seems to have had a couple of
special-purpose base registers (FP and SB), 8 general-purpose
registers (like the 8088), and an indirect addressing mode.  Unlike
the 8088, its instructions are (generally) two-address instructions.

I'm somewhat alarmed by the remark on p. 356, “This solution strictly
limits the size of modules” — how small do they have to be?  None of
the ones listed on p. 18 was more than about 12 kilobytes.

The code generator itself occupies pp. 357–367, more or less.  56
lines of code seem to fit on a page, but, as commented before, the
lines are uncomfortably long.

On p. 368 we are introduced to the very primitive debugger.

Reading p. 369 it occurs to me that perhaps the debug information the
debugger reads should be the same information the compiler uses to
tell itself where things are stored.

On p. 374 Wirth tells the story of how he saw Chuck Thacker’s SIL
written in BCPL on an Alto at PARC in 1976 and went to write his own
in Modula-2 on a PDP-11, which grew gradually into the Oberon graphics
editor.

On p. 385 we have the viewer-broadcast update mechanism from p. 48
explained again.

On p. 388 we have the 1980s view of object-orientation: its virtue is
that it allows you to dynamically load machine code you don’t have the
source code to, as long as it implements a calling interface you do, by
means of “the extensible record type and the procedure variable”.  Yuck.

On p. 407 we find that they encountered the object-graph serialization
problem (“pickle”) in the graphics editor, solving it with an object
table.  Later on pp. 435–436 we see that in the ensuing years they
generalized this approach to arbitrary object graphs, using it for the
repertoire of objects in a text as well.

There is a screenshot from 1995-09-21 on p. 440, showing the state of
the Oberon system at that time, with desktop icons, overlapping
windows, over 1000 messages in a mailbox, and still regrettable
non-antialiased pixel fonts.
