Someone Tweeted today that it was absurd to have “influencer” as a job
title, because it presupposes success — you might as well say you had
been hired as a “bestselling novelist” instead of an author, for
example.

There are a lot of job titles that are like this, though.  It’s
commonplace to hear professors of philosophy use the word
“philosopher” to mean “professor of philosophy”, for example, as if
Socrates had been a professor, or Einstein had been a gravitational
field, or as if a tenure committee could confer a love of wisdom on a
fool.  “Hacker”, too, is a title of acclaim, earned by achievement,
not a hobby or a job title; calling yourself a “hacker” is one step
below calling yourself a “genius”, which is, of course, also used as a
job title nowadays, by Apple.

There’s a persistent meme that “engineer” is a similar sort of
arrogant self-praise, since, ever since the disaster in Texas, various
places have formal licensing requirements for “engineers” similar to
those for braiding hairs or painting nails, with the ostensible
purpose of preventing any more children from being exploded by
poorly-designed gas systems or other machines.  But an “engineer” has
been, since at least the 15th century, one who makes engines; the
licensing requirements are new and far from universal.  Calling your
creation an “engine”, however, *is* a kind of self-praise, at least
etymologically — you’re saying it’s *ingenious*, as the cognate word
“engine” has meant “clever scheme” (and thence “machine”) for over a
millennium.  Moreover, you’re etymologically attributing this
cleverness to your inborn qualities, thus “in+genitus”, rather than hard
work or good luck.

Surely we could go further with these flattering and optimistic job
titles, though.  Managers might feel left out of the fun, since their
title implies they’re just getting by; let’s call them “organizational
geniuses”, or if, that makes them worry that you’ll ask them to fix
your iPhone, “master strategists”.  We could call taxi drivers
“motorsport champions”, and cooks “gourmet chefs” — though I think the
world may be ahead of me on that one, since I’m pretty sure I’ve met
self-proclaimed “gourmet chefs” who didn’t have even a single Michelin
star or prep cook.  Oil-change mechanics could be “automotive
engineers”, though that doesn’t really capture the same self-satisfied
aspirational flavor as “influencer”.
