I've been thinking for a while about how to reduce the number of
motors needed in a robot, because motors are the only mechanical part
you can't reasonably 3-D print (or resin-cast, or laser-cut, or made
with other easily-accessible means of automated fabrication), and
they're also kind of heavy, expensive, and unreliable.

Also, in some cases, it makes sense to use an internal-combustion
engine rather than an electric motor to supply mechanical power to the
robot, because it can use fuel, which stores energy two orders of
magnitude more densely than batteries do, thus allowing two orders of
magnitude more autonomy.  Where a battery-powered quadcopter can fly
for 15 to 25 minutes, a gasoline-powered one of similar design could
reasonably expect to fly for hundreds of hours; but internal-
combustion engines don't currently scale down nearly as small as
electric motors without serious loss of efficiency.  Boston Dynamics'
spectacular designs typically use pneumatic actuators powered by what
sounds like a two-stroke internal-combustion engine, but I haven't
investigated in more detail.

Armatron
--------

When I was a kid, I had a robot arm from Radio Shack called Armatron.
It had six degrees of freedom: two rotations at the shoulder, rotation
at the elbow, two rotations at the wrist, and opening and closing a
gripper; but it had only a single motor, which ran continuously at a
fixed speed as long as the robot was turned on.  The two twistable
joysticks mechanically engaged the various degrees of freedom with the
motor or a brake, and through a set of slip-clutches, the force
through each degree of freedom was limited to the small forces that
the cheap nylon parts could handle easily without risk of breakage.
It was a toy, but mechanically, it was a beautiful design.

It's not obvious that this is directly applicable to the problem of
designing an electrically controlled robot, because you'd still need
some kind of mechanical actuator for each of the degrees of freedom —
but now to operate the joystick rather than to directly actuate.  This
is a big improvement in a sense; you can get by with solenoids or very
small motors.

Below, though, I revisit this problem, with a camshaft-based solution.

Turtlebot
---------

Consider the problem of a Roomba-like turtle robot, a horizontal disc
with driven left and right wheels, plus maybe some idler wheels to
keep stable.  If you mount a pen in the middle of it, as with the
original Logo turtle robots from the 1970s, you can draw any
continuous shape on the floor just by alternating between turning in
place and moving forward.  You don't even need to turn both
directions or move backwards.

In particular, you can draw smooth lines at any angle, without being
able to independently control X and Y actuators.

You can straightforwardly achieve this with two motors, one on each
wheel.  But it occurred to me, thinking about this, that a single
reversible motor would also work.  It would drive, say, the left wheel
directly, and the other wheel through a sort of mechanical full-wave
rectifier, such that the other wheel always turns the same direction
regardless of which direction the motor is turning.  You could achieve
this by driving the shaft of the wheel through two sprag clutches that
freewheel in the same direction, one driven in the same direction as
the motor (perhaps directly by the motor's shaft), and the other
driven in the opposite direction, perhaps through a bevel gear between
it and the first ring.

(You can 3-D print or, I think, even laser-cut a reasonable
approximation to a sprag clutch in two or three relatively simple
flexible parts, if you're not too worried about maximizing torque per
volume.)

With this simple mechanical arrangement, the right wheel always drives
forward, while the left wheel can go either forward, to move the
robot, or backward, to turn it.  So a single reversible motor should
enable you to draw any figure, limited by your control system (I've
argued elsewhere that closed-loop feedback is now cheap enough that we
should apply it in almost every case now) and the very small backlash
of your rectifier mechanism.

RepRap and 3-D printers
-----------------------

A different problem from the turtlebot is the 3-D printer, which
typically needs four degrees of movement freedom — in a case like the
RepRap Prusa Mendel, you have two parallel Z motors suspending the X
motor via triangular-thread allthread bars as linear actuators, the X
motor moving the print head via a belt drive, a reversible extruder
motor on the print head itself pushing the filament into the hotend,
and a Y motor moving the heated bed via the same kind of belt drive as
the X motor; a total of five motors with four degrees of freedom.  The
motors used are heavy, expensive NEMA 23 stepper motors, which are
uncommon enough that it's hard to salvage them from e-waste, even
though e-waste is full of motors.  And, of course, printing such a
motor on the RepRap is far beyond its current capabilities.

(Ganging together multiple smaller motors to drive a single shaft is
probably the right response to the problem of having only smaller
motors easily available.)

I've thought (and I wasn't the only one) that you could dispense with
the Z stage if, say, you replace the Y actuator with a circular θ
actuator, and goes up a Z step every time the θ actuator makes a full
revolution.  The biggest problem with this is that, with the
straightforward approach where the Z movement is directly controlled
by one or more screw threads that revolve 1:1 with the θ actuator, you
go up by an entire thread pitch.  1mm is the finest thread pitch
commonly available in Allthread rods.  But a 1mm Z-step is a very
large step.  0.35mm and 0.25mm are more common layer thicknesses,
providing more acceptable surface finishes, avoiding the need for
extreme plastic feedrates, which would require a much larger hotend
and extruder motor, as well as suffering more from heat-induced damage
to the plastic's chemical structure and slumping before cooling.
Gearing down the θ rotation by 10× would be sufficient to solve this
problem.

That reduces the machine from five motors to, say, three.  If we are
willing to limit the horizontal planar scan to a single fixed pattern,
where we don't get to choose the direction of movement at each "pixel"
but only how much material to deposit there, then we can gear the θ
movement to the X movement, which probably should also become
circular.  This dramatically reduces the efficiency of the device and
worsens surface finish, but with a sufficiently small build volume,
perhaps it could be acceptable anyway.  Essentially we have gone from
a 3-D plotter to a raster 3-D printer, although with a funny circular
scan pattern.

And now we have only two motors to control independently.

If we are to recapture the horizontal surface-finish and a shadow of
the efficiency we got with our vector plotter, we could perhaps use
the turtlebot approach: have a single motor alternate between
determining the direction of motion, while stationary, and determining
the speed of motion.  In the RepRap context, this will cause some ooze
problems, as the hotend's plastic extrusion rate is more or less a
low-pass-filtered version of the extrusion motor's movement.  (Thus
oozebane and similar techniques in current FDM slicers depend on
briefly reversing the extruder motor.)

How would this work?  So far all the things I've thought of are
ridiculously complicated and depend on analog mechanical computation
devices called "integrators" "integration", which turn the position of
their input into the rate of motion of their output, thus numerically
(or analogically) approximating the computation of a definite
integral.  There are several different types that work by different
mechanisms.  In the mechanical computation context, integrators are
notoriously sensitive devices, but I suspect that closed-loop control
could fix that problem in this context.  The [famous Navy film about
fire-control computers][0] goes into some detail about the relevant
mechanisms.

[0]: http://youtu.be/s1i-dnAH9Y4 "MN-6783a, MN-6783b, US Navy"

However, mechanisms that are ridiculously complicated when you have to
cut all of their parts out of metal, with dimensions accurate to five
significant figures, might no longer be ridiculously complicated when
you can 3-D print them and compensate for their dimensional errors
using closed-loop digital control.

That leaves us with two motors: one to control the X-Y (or rather θ-φ)
scanning, bringing along Z for the ride, and another on the extruder.
Can we get rid of the extruder motor?

Well, if we always extrude at a constant speed, perhaps through some
kind of a gravity feed, we could control the amount deposited in each
location by varying how rapidly we pass over it.  But this seems
relatively impractical, especially with materials like plastic, which
is light and therefore hard to gravity-feed and can be usefully
deposited through a very small orifice.  (The orifice is almost
inevitably smaller than the filament extruded, because the plastic
swells upon being released from the orifice.)

For a machine to produce sand paintings, on the other hand — perhaps
even very vertical sand paintings with "magic sand" — it might work
perfectly.

Camshafts and Armatron revisited
--------------------------------

Another thing we often want is a large number of very simple
actuators, such as valves which can be either open or closed, or pens
that can be either up or down.  If we can accept intermediate
glitches, we can achieve this by driving all of the actuators on a
camshaft where the cams are the different bits of a binary code, and
the rotational positions of the camshaft are the different codes; the
followers read off the various bits of the code for the current
position.  Many traffic lights in Buenos Aires, for example, work this
way, with the cam followers actuating electric switches.

In the general case of N actuators, your camshaft needs to be able to
distinguish among 2^N rotational positions, although by using Gray
codes, the minimum width of a cam lobe can be twice that, and the
overall number of bit changes can be minimized to the 2^N minimum.  In
some cases, not all possible codewords are necessary.

This, again, can be driven by a single motor that turns in one
direction to select the set of actuators to be activated, and then in
the opposite direction to provide mechanical power that is routed
through them.  (For example, pumping hydraulic fluid through a set of
open valves, or driving a set of engaged gears.)

In particular, this is a possible solution to the Armatron problem:
you have six pairs of mutually exclusive actuators, or equivalently
six three-position actuators, so we need 3⁶ = 729 distinct positions
of the camshaft, which is a bit much; but it's probably adequate to be
able to engage two or three of the joints at a time, rather than all
six, which reduces the number of combinations dramatically.  (I'm too
lazy to calculate the case for up to three joints right now, but you
can see that 2C6 = 6×5/2 = 15 pairs of joints, each of which can be
engaged in 4 ways for a total of 60, plus six individual joints
engaged in two directions for 12, plus all idle for 1, brings us down
from 729 to 73 camshaft orientations, which is eminently feasible.)