If you have a state machine with one-hot encoding, perhaps because
you're computing your state transitions with non-inverting a logic
family such as diode logic, then with two bits of output you have two
states; with three bits of output you have three states, with four
bits of output you have four states; and with five bits of output you
can either have five states, or if you split your state into a two-bit
output and a three-bit output, six states.  With six bits of output
you can have six states, or three chunks of two bits giving you eight
states, or two chunks of three bits giving you nine.

This is an interesting thing; by using ternary instead of binary, your
state machine gets the power to representation an extra state.  It's
not much, but it's something.  And it compounds: with 24 lines of
output split into 8 groups of 3, you get 3⁸ = 6561 states, while if
you split it into 12 groups of 2, you get only 2¹² = 4096.  It's about
5.7% extra information per bit: instead of getting 0.5 bits per bit,
you get 0.53 bits per bit.

That is, the optimal number of states per state-machine variable is
three.

***

Suppose you're trying to factor a target finite-length comb FIR kernel
into a set of sparse FIR kernels that convolve to produce your target
kernel; you want to minimize the number of multiply-accumulates per
sample.  If you convolve a comb with three unit impulses separated by
eight empty points (zero samples) with another comb with three unit
impulses separated by two, you get a comb with nine unit impulses
separated by eight intervals of two empty points, at a cost of six
multiply-accumulates.  By contrast, if you convolve three combs with
two unit impulses each, separated by two, five, and seven empty
samples, you do the same number of multiply-accumulates and get a comb
with unit impulses separated by two empty points --- but only eight of
them rather than nine.  The same is true if you replace two of those
two-impulse combs with a four-impulse comb.  Things get worse as you
move to less-sparse kernels with five, six, or more nonzero points.

That is, the optimal number of impulses per kernel, in some sense, is
three.

***

If you're building a balanced search tree and you want to minimize the
number of keys you have to compare your probe key against, binary is
the best branching factor: each comparison result gives you exactly
one bit of information.  But consider, instead, a menu system user
interface for an idealized user who makes no errors but must read each
menu item before deciding, correctly, whether to select it or not, but
who may be seeking an operation not present in the menu tree.  How do
you minimize the number of menu items the user must read when
successfully navigating the system?

If there are two items in each menu, the user must read, on average,
one of them before making a successful selection, so she will need to
select lg N menu items to reach her final destination; say, 20 items
if there are 1048576 total possibilities.  If there are four, she must
read on average two items, but need only make half as many selections:
10, while reading 20, just as before.  If there are three, she must
read on average 1.5, while selecting about log₃ N times --- in this
case, 12.6 selections, reading 1.5 items each time, for a total of
about 18.9 menu items read.

So it turns out that the optimal number of menu items, in some sense,
is three.

(Real menu systems, of course, have to deal with other cognitive
issues: how do you organize hundreds or thousands of things in such a
way that users can guess or even remember which category each thing is
in?)

***

Suppose you want to make a program as debuggable as possible.  How big
should your functions be?

To be a little more concrete, suppose you're trying to track down an
incorrect result from the execution of a program that runs for a
hundred billion instructions, or about a minute.  If the program is
built out of functions that call other functions and combine their
results, and you can tell from looking at each result whether it's
correct or not, maybe you can navigate to the result you want by
expanding the execution history as an outline.

If each function calls three other functions, then within 24 clicks,
you can make your way from the top-level result to the particular
incorrect result; at each step, you have to examine on average 1.5
intermediate results, so you need to look at about 35 results.

If each function calls only two other functions, you have to look at
about 37 results, which is slightly worse; and the same is true if
each function calls four other functions.

So, in some simplified sense, the optimum branching factor for
function-call graphs is three.

***

The number of nodes you have to traverse to reach one of N nodes with
branching factor B is ceil(log N / log B), and if you're examining
each of the B branches in the node to figure out which one to follow,
you end up examining B ceil(log N / log B) branches.  If we remove the
discretization, we get log N (B / log B), and it turns out that B /
log B has a minimum at B = e, so in practice the optimal branching
factor is 3.

That's the phenomenon underlying the above simplified problems.  But,
as you can see, B/log B is pretty flat over the 2 to 4 region.  It
jumps up to infinity as you approach 1, and from e on, it grows
slowly.  It's only 0.4% worse than optimal at B = 3, 6% worse (as seen
above) at B = 2 or 4, 15% worse than optimal at B = 5, 60% worse at
B = 10, twice as bad at B = 15, and 3.2 times as bad at B = 30.  So
it's easy for the optimal factor in the real world to be anywhere
between 2 and 10, depending on what other things you're trying to
optimize.

For example:

* in the case of the state machine, your state-transition logic might
  be simpler with one-hot encoding among six output lines rather than
  some kind of conjunction over a group of two and a group of three,
  and that might pay the cost of the extra line;
* in the factored FIR filter, you might be trying to produce a comb
  with eight or ten impulses, in which case convolving two impulses
  with four or five works, and nothing involving three will;
* in a menu system, you have to make the menu items reasonably
  comprehensible, which usually requires a larger branching factor.
* while debugging a program, changing stack frames has a cognitive
  cost, where you have to orient yourself in your new surroundings,
  and it can be practically very difficult to make a program in which
  each function calls only three others.  The optimum for this is
  maybe somewhere between 5 and 18.
