Reading Victor Papanek and James Hennessey's inspiring 1974 _Nomadic
Furniture 2_ and looking at the interesting "Jim's Peg-Lock System" on
p. 108, I got to thinking about camlocks as a substitute for screws.

Jim's Peg-Lock System inserts a short wooden dowel into a round hole
through a square piece *intersecting* a wooden dowel of the same size
run through another round hole in the same square piece at right
angles to it --- slightly skew to it but without enough distance
between their axes to prevent interference.  This is reportedly
explained in more detail in _Nomadic Furniture 1_ pp. 126-7; from this
volume, though, it's not clear whether you cut a bite out of the other
dowel or just compress the heck out of the wood.  If there's a bite
out of the other dowel, it will be under no force, but cannot be
withdrawn from its hole unless the peg is removed.  If there's no
bite, or a bite that's slightly too small, the wedging mechanical
advantage is potentially enormous.

This got me to thinking about the celt, a type of stone axe, and oval
dowels.  If you stick an oval dowel in an oval hole made to fit it
loosely, it can slide linearly but binds up if you start rotating.  If
you apply further force, you may be able to get it to rotate 90°,
depending on how oval it is.  (In the circular limit, the mechanical
advantage is infinite, but the displacement is zero, so the force is
limited by the sponginess of the wood.)

If the short axis of the oval hole runs across the grain of the wood,
then the rotated oval dowel will be pressing against endgrain, like a
well-made celt; in this configuration it will not fall out from
moisture changes and will not tend to split the wood.  At the 90°
rotation angle, it is in an equilibrium; it does not have a tendency
to twist back one way or the other.  There are no stress risers
because the wooden surfaces are smoothly curved.  Some kind of wax,
drying oil, or soap might be a good way to lubricate the initial
assembly in a way that stabilizes it further without making
disassembly impossible; glue would make the joint permanent.

If instead the oval hole's long axis is parallel to the wood grain and
a slit cut is made to the end of the wood, through the oval hole, and
some distance beyond, the rotation of the wooden dowel can force the
holed wood to expand laterally, pressing on the inside of some other
slot or hole, rather like a wedge tenon, but reversible.  If the slot
or hole is closer to the fulcrum than the hole is, this can provide a
further mechanical advantage.  An unoccupied round hole at the base of
the slit can eliminate stress risers there and increase compliance for
this use.

Alternatives to an unobtainium oval dowel might include two round
dowels with equal flats cut on one side and face-glued, and an
eccentric round dowel, like a crankshaft.  The eccentric round dowel
is easier if the two cylinders are of different sizes so that one is
entirely contained in the hypothetical extension of the other.  This
crank configuration, if used to power a prismatic joint by sliding in
a slot, provides a variable mechanical advantage that reaches a
zero-displacement singularity, like a Vise-Grip or similar toggle
linkage.  If movement is permitted a bit past this singularity and
then stopped, for example by the end of the slot, it can support a
*stable* equilibrium not dependent on friction and thus not vulnerable
to vibration.

A similar stable equilibrium can be provided in the oval-hole
mechanism by pooching out the sides of the oval hole a bit at the ends
of the short axis, thus converting the unstable equilibrium into a
stable equilibrium (with unstable equilibria near it on each side),
and eliminating the need for linseed oil or whatever as a form of wood
Loctite.

If, instead of sliding against the wall of a slot near the end of its
travel, the eccentric dowel is rolling another disc or dowel along a
track, it may be possible to make this mechanism work without any
sliding friction, just rolling friction.  If the two eccentric arcs
are cut into opposite edges of a piece of material, it may be possible
to make the entire wedging mechanism planar with sheet cutting.

Mechanisms like these are viable alternatives to screws in many
situations.
