Suppose we want a solar hot-water-heating panel to never heat above 49
degrees under normal circumstances,
so that the water it heats never becomes dangerously hot.
"Normal circumstances" might
involve a temperature of, say, 35 degrees outdoors.  One way to do
this would be to have a thermal resistance between the panel and the
environment that allows a heat flux equivalent to the absorbed
sunlight once there's a 14-kelvin difference: given,
say,
800 watts per
square meter, you need a U-factor of 800 watts/14 kelvin square
meters, or an R value of 14 kelvin m²/800 W, or R = 0.018 K m² / W;
that's about equivalent to an inch of concrete.  However, typical
outdoor air film values are around R = 0.03 K m² / W --- on each side,
so 0.015 on both sides together.

If that wasn't enough thermal conductance, you could reduce the
sunlight by angling the panels or painting them gray or shading them
or whatever so that they only collect 400 W/m² or something, and then
you should be fine.  But there's another problem, which is that that
14-kelvin difference above ambient is still a 14-kelvin difference
above ambient when ambient drops to 0 degrees, which will give you
14-degree "hot" water.

That's not really acceptable!  To have a passively safe design that
still provides adequate heat in winter, you need some kind of more
consistent heat sink than the air.  Maybe radiating to the sky could
work: you use some insulation to keep from losing heat to the nearby
air, and radiate your extra heat as infrared into deep space.

For this, you would have enough insulation to permit the difference
from ambient air to be up to 50 degrees or so (R = 0.06 K m² / W,
which should be achievable with nothing more than some trapped air
spaces) while permitting infrared radiation to get to space, in
particular around the ten-micron wavelength.  Transparent polyethylene
film trapping air spaces will apparently work for this (see patent
<http://www.google.com/patents/US5493126>), but it photodegrades
rapidly enough that it would need replacement every few months.
Acrylic (plexiglass) transmits near infrared; I think it transmits
thermal infrared (LWIR) as well, but I haven't tested.  FT-IR spectra
on the web for polyethylene terephthalate
<http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/32476> suggest that it,
too, transmits LWIR well, and it can survive solar ultraviolet for a
long time.

Anyway, then, you just need to angle the panel so that it will be
sufficiently coupled to the part of the sky that doesn't have the sun
in it to shed the heat it acquires from the sun.

A nice thing about this kind of radiative cooling is that the power
transmitted is proportional to the fourth power of the temperature.
So if you're transmitting 800 W/m² at 49 degrees (322 K), at 43
degrees (316 K) you'll be transmitting 740 W/m², and at 30 degrees
(303 K) you'll only be transmitting 627 W/m² --- you'll have a whole
173 W/m² pushing you toward your target temperature.  Unfortunately
this is still not enough to be very robust against efficiency losses
in picking up the heat.  arccos(627/800) is about 38 degrees (of
arc!), and arccos(740/800) is only 22 degrees --- so whenever the sun
is further than 22 degrees from at right angles to the panel, it won't
be able to heat the water above 43 degrees C.  Which means, at best, 3
hours a day.

But that's for a flat panel!  If the collector isn't flat (for
example, if it consists of multiple flat panels at different angles),
it will absorb heat from the sun at a more consistent rate throughout
the day.  That solves the intermittency angle problem.  (The
requirement that
the thermal emission equal the sunlight at the maximum safe
temperature can be met, as before, by adjusting the angle of attack to
the sunlight.)

The big problem with that approach is its low efficiency.  Heating
from 0 degrees to 43 degrees, you start off with about 48% efficiency
(1-(273/322)^4) but end up with 7% efficiency (1-(316/322)^4).  That
means you end up with panels covering many times more area, for
safety, than you would need simply to gather the appropriate amount of
energy, simply because the vast majority of the energy gathered is
re-radiated immediately.

There might be a way to avoid this problem: creating a sufficiently
selective surface.  Blackbody radiation has a fairly sharp cutoff at
its top frequency, and absorption bands in plastics also have fairly
sharp cutoffs.  It might be possible to put together a blend of
transparent plastics that block essentially all radiation longer than,
say, 8000 nanometers, but have one or two orders of magnitude more
transmissivity for shorter wavelengths.  A black surface covered with
such plastics would have an emissivity that jumped sharply (from, say,
0.001 up to 0.1 or 0.2) upon reaching a target temperature.  A
sufficiently large radiator of such a surface, backed by sufficiently
good heat transport, would maintain a narrow range of temperatures
over a wide range of heat flows.
