In outgoing-notes-mail-01.

A resistive-capacitive trackpad made from garbage and three ADC microcontroller pins
====================================================================================

(Not yet tested.)

It occurred to me that you can probably make a resistive trackpad out
of pencil lead on paper, sensing the position of a conductive probe in
the conductive patch by measuring the resistance to various points
around the edge many times per second.  This should be doable with a
few tri-stateable digital GPIO pins and a capacitor whose discharge
time we measure, or a few analog input pins.

Perhaps you could even make this work with human fingers, even
providing multitouch, even capacitively through a protective surface
layer (say, a plastic shopping bag) to keep the graphite off your
fingers, protect the microcontroller from static electricity, and
maybe keep you from getting shocked by power surges.

It turns out that, in theory, the resistance in a uniform flat sheet
is low and highly dependent on probe contact area when your probes are
close together, but then approaches some limit, determined by the
resistivity and thickness, as your probes get further and further
apart.  This might mean you need to have quite a number of probes.

Normal trackpads work differently
---------------------------------

Normal resistive trackpads have a grid of wires, with the X and Y
wires running in two separate layers and a resistive layer between
them, which becomes less resistive under pressure.  Normal capacitive
trackpads have a grid of wires, too, but use capacitive coupling to
your finger instead of sensing pressure.

This trackpad design doesn't have a grid of wires at all, just a
resistive plane, which is much easier to fabricate.

Resistance tests with pencil lead
---------------------------------

In my first test, I blackened a patch on a post-it note (Stick'N
brand) rather thoroughly with an HB pencil, moving the post-it around
a bit to blacken in different directions to avoid voids in the
graphite caused by roughness of the desk surface, and measured with an
ohmmeter resistances of some 2–5kΩ over distances of 1–4 cm, and as
low as 1kΩ with probes close together (≈1mm).

(As predicted by theory, the resistance depends strongly on probe
contact area.  Using a couple of big coins, I was able to get
measurements down to 300Ω, and the limit at larger distances was about
2kΩ instead of 5kΩ.)

In a second test, instead, I drew a grid which was about 90% empty
space and 10% fairly dark lines with the same pencil.  With this, I
was able to get readings of a few hundred kΩ on my ohmmeter over
distances of a centimeter or so, but they weren't very consistent.

In a third test, I gradually darkened a patch with the pencil until I
started to get consistent continuity between different parts of the
patch, at which point I was getting readings of 200–500kΩ over 1–4 cm,
although I don't totally trust my analog ohmmeter at such large
resistances.  Even with the probes separated by only 1mm or so, I was
still getting 100kΩ or so.  This patch was much less dark than the
other one, but the other one certainly did not contain 100 times as
much graphite; so I assume that the majority of the graphite particles
in this one are not participating in the conductivity.

I hypothesize that you might be able to reliably get an even higher
sheet resistance this way, but it might help if you have really smooth
paper to start with — glossy magazine or inkjet-photo stock, say.

Measuring distance to the capacitive patch where your finger is
---------------------------------------------------------------

If you press your finger against a layer of polyethylene on top of the
pencil lead, your finger and the pencil lead form a capacitor.  (I
thought about using paper instead of polyethylene, but it's six times
as thick.)

Your finger contact area might be 1.5cm², and a plastic shopping bag
might be 13 μm thick, according to Multi-Pak's "Thick and Thin of
Plastic Bags".  C = εA/d, and the permittivity ε of polyethylene is
2.25 times that of free space ε₀, which is about 8.9 pF/m.  So we have
8.9 pF/m * 2.25 * 1.5cm² / 13μm ≈ 220pF.

Now, we'd like the circuit capacitive reactance to be close to the
resistance of the pencil lead in the distance from the point of
contact to the place where the measurement terminals are attached.  If
the resistance is much greater than the capacitive reactance, the
signal will be attenuated unnecessarily, making the circuit too
susceptible to noise; if it's much smaller, the signal will reach all
of the measurement terminals almost equally, and you won't be able to
tell where on the paper the touch happened.  Let's say the pencil lead
resistance is in the 1–30kΩ range, or 10kΩ, to be concrete.

It turns out that people have about 1pF of capacitance to power lines,
and also about 100pF of capacitance to ground.  If we use that
capacitance to ground, then we can use an AC voltage we send into the
trackpad ourselves, at a frequency chosen to optimize the capacitive
reactance, and most of the circuit reactance will be from the 100pF
reactance to ground.

(Note that this depends on your skin.
<http://dev.laptop.org/ticket/8071> reports that people with calloused
hands had trouble with the early OLPC XO's capacitive trackpad because
the dry callous put people's blood too far from the trackpad.  If
we're depending on a dielectric thickness of 13 microns, we'll have
the same problem.  I guess you can lick your fingers though.)

So if we want 10kΩ of capacitive reactance out of 100pF,
X_C = 1/(2πfC), so we have f = 1/(10kΩ * 2π 100pF) ≈ 160kHz.  It's
trivial to generate a 160kHz square wave on pretty much any
microcontroller, and if your VCC is 5V, it's pretty much 5V
peak-to-peak and 2.5V RMS.  That should be easy as pie to sense: with
14kΩ impedance, it's 180 microamps, -3dBm.

To look at it in the time domain instead of the frequency domain,
we're charging the patch of graphite under your finger up to 5 volts
or whatever VCC is, through the resistance of the graphite between
that patch and our probe.  The time it takes to charge it up will tell
us the RC product of that system, and we expect it to be on the order
of 6μs, which is a time that we can measure to about 6 bits of
precision without even using an ADC.  If we do use an ADC, like the
10-bit ADC on a lot of AVRs, we should be able to estimate the RC time
constant of the charging curve to higher precision.

The RC constant by itself tells us very little, because we don't know
the area of the finger contact patch, and that's a factor of C.  But
if we have several different probes in different locations, we can
probe with each of them in sequence; we can assume the finger contact
patch isn't changing much in 6μs.  This tells us something about the
relative distances, from which we can estimate the position of the
contact patch; and given that, we can estimate its area.

It's common to have fewer pins capable of ADC input than capable of
digital output.  But I think that doesn't need to be a limitation for
this application; you can use one probe to measure the voltage the
contact patch is charged to, while using another one to apply the
charging pulse.  As long as the input impedance of the ADC pin is high
compared to the impedance of the contact patch's path to ground, the
ADC probe voltage should follow the contact patch's voltage very
closely — unless it's too close to the active probe, in which case it
will see some kind of weighted average of the active probe's voltage
and the contact patch's voltage.  The ATMega328 datasheet
(doc8161.pdf) says the input pin capacitance is a max of 10pF (p.321),
so the ADC input capacitance shouldn't be a big problem.  It should be
possible to separate out the weighted-average components, since
they'll have two very different time constants.

So I think you should be able to get by with three or four ADC pins at
different corners of the touch area, with active probes in potentially
more places; at least two active probes and, I think, three total
probes will be needed to triangulate unambiguously.  So you need at
least three ADC pins and two GPIO pins, but the ADC pins can double as
GPIO pins.

6μs might be *too* fast; while the ATMega328 can do a sample-and-hold
more quickly than this, it needs much more time to do a complete ADC
conversion.  So you might end up having to build up the picture of the
complete charging waveform by sampling one point on each of a number
of charging waveforms, by adjusting the "phase" delay between the
initiation of a charging pulse and the ADC measurement.

Alternatively, as described in the section above about my experiments,
you might be able to simply establish a thinner film of pencil lead to
further increase the R part of the RC time constant.  60μs should be
plenty of time.

You probably need at least four data points on each curve to untangle
the effects of R, C, and the effect of resistively-coupled voltage
from the active probe.  You're measuring, minimum, six separate
curves, so you need at least 24 data points.  If you need 13 μs per
data point, at which point the ATMega328 datasheet says the error is
4.5 ulps (LSB), which I guess is ±, so you really only have about 7.5
bits of accuracy, then you need 312 μs to take a full position and
patch size measurement.  You can probably average your measurements
over considerably more than that, which means you can measure many
more points per curve.

If your final measurements are a result of measuring each curve 64
times instead of 4, giving you 5 ms latency, your estimates for R
should be good to about 11 or 12 bits, and your estimates for C (since
you're measuring it six times as often) should be good to about 14
bits.  All in all, this gives you 6*11.5 + 14 = 83 bits of data, which
is probably highly redundant, but which can hopefully localize your
finger with great precision.

Resistive-touchscreen style
---------------------------

Wikipedia explains analogue resistive touchscreens as follows:

> two flexible sheets coated with a resistive material and separated
> by an air gap or microdots.... during operation of a four-wire
> touchscreen, a uniform, unidirectional voltage gradient is applied
> to the first sheet. When the two sheets are pressed together, the
> second sheet measures the voltage as distance along the first sheet,
> providing the X coordinate. When this contact coordinate has been
> acquired, the voltage gradient is applied to the second sheet to
> ascertain the Y coordinate.

This also seems like it might be a reasonable approach to use with two
sheets of paper.  You could dump eraser crumbs or a few curly hairs or
something in between them to keep them mostly apart when they're not
being pressed.

Alternative materials
---------------------

Pencil lead is one useful and easily available resistive material that
can be easily deposited in a film, for example on paper; actual lead,
aluminum, gold, and carbon black are four others.  Lead is about 50
times more conductive than pure graphite, and pencil lead is only part
graphite.  Aluminum and gold are another 10 times more conductive
still.

Aluminum has the potential advantage for this application that it's
widely available in the garbage in large, highly uniform sheets
sputtered onto Mylar, which are then coated with an insulating layer
of plastic even finer than a plastic grocery bag.  These layers of
aluminum are so thin that they're actually visibly transparent, when
there isn't too much ink on top of them.  If you put LEDs behind them,
you could make an actual touchscreen.

However, I have so far been completely unsuccessful at making
electrical connections to these aluminum layers.  Aluminum is
notoriously tricky to connect to electrically at the best of times,
due to sapphire spontaneously forming on its surface, and much more so
when it's in the form of a sub-micron-thickness film inside a much
tougher plastic film.

Aluminum rubbed onto the surface of paper, like pencil lead or lead,
might be more promising, especially if you drip solder or something on
top of it immediately afterwards.

Charcoal is, in theory, somewhat conductive, and you can rub it on
paper, but in my feeble attempts with a burned match, I haven't been
able to get it to conduct.  It's easier to come by in garbage than
lead, graphite, gold, or bulk aluminum, so it might be worth further
investigation.

Gold is expensive, but gold leaf is so thin that it's cheap enough
that people throw it away, or even drink it in Goldschlager.  I don't
have any handy here, but it might work for this.

Carbon black is conductive, and indeed is used in the microphone
design that made the telephone practical, since its resistance varies
with pressure.  It's also easy to deposit in a film on a surface: you
burn something, anything carbon-bearing, with a flame, and the smoke
deposits as a film.  (If the flame is too clean-burning, you may have
to put an object actually inside the flame to get the carbon black to
deposit.  You can do this with a cigarette lighter.)  I think you can
get a more uniform film this way than by rubbing solid objects onto
abrasive paper, but the film is very fragile, except where it's
nestled down into a pore in a porous surface.

However, its very fragility means that you can very easily cut very
fine lines into it: if you deposit it onto glass or plastic, you can
rub it off with your finger, or the end of a wire, or a piece of dry
grass.  If you had a way to deposit some kind of insulating fixative
on top of it (superglue? boiled linseed oil? dried eggwhite? glue down
a shopping bag?) and deposit more carbon black on top of that, maybe
you could make the grid of wires used in traditional capacitive
trackpads.

Paper, as I mentioned before, is another possible dielectric; its big
disadvantage is that it's typically several times thicker than a
shopping bag.  However, it might have advantages, too.  You can write
on it more easily.

It would be cool to have a transparent dielectric that can be
illuminated from the edge, because then you could have like glowing
letters and shit etched into its surface illuminated by total internal
reflection, like the menu for every third tourist bar in this damn
town.  Unfortunately, I don't think you can do that in a sheet of
dielectric that's thin enough to leave a reasonable amount of
capacitance between your finger and the graphite.  If it's 100 microns
thick, the thickness of paper, the capacitance drops to 30 pF; if it's
200 microns thick, it drops to 15 pF.  It might be hard to sense a
mere 15 pF on top of the 7–10 pF on every AVR input pin and the ≈14pF
of the sample-and-hold capacitor.

If you find an unbroken LCD screen in the garbage, you ought to be
able to use the transparent indium tin oxide ("ITO") electrodes
deposited on the glass surface for a high-resolution grid of wires.
But it might be cooler to use it as an LCD.

