Could you listen to every FM radio station at once on your PC?

Standard FM radio runs from 87.5 MHz to 108 MHz with channels
typically every 800 kHz or so in a given geographical area, although
in theory they can be spaced as close as 200 kHz apart.  That’s
20.5 MHz divided into 103 200 kHz channels, of which typically about
25 are used.  If an SDR is to pick up all of that 20.5 MHz at once, it
needs to sample at 41 Msps or, preferably, substantially more, like
60 Msps, which is probably feasible with some work — I mean 640×480
video at 60 fps is 18 Msps per color channel, 55 Msps in total.
(Direct downconversion sampling may be feasible with some filtering.
Sampling at baseband would require 215 Msps.)

A couple of different algorithms occurred to me to do this: one using
a bank of phase-locked loops (“PLLs”) and one using a phase vocoder.
Both seem likely to be feasible on a desktop PC, but the phase-vocoder
approach should scale to a larger number of channels more efficiently.

Analyzing channels with PLLs
----------------------------

But then there’s the issue of how to analyze the channels.  You can of
course run a PLL on each channel — say, 25 or 30 PLLs in all.
Officially FM mono has 15 kHz of audio bandwidth, but unlike in AM, in
FM there isn’t a simple relationship between audio bandwidth and radio
bandwidth — a 1 Hz audio signal could be encoded by swinging the
frequency of the FM carrier back and forth over a “frequency
deviation” of 1 MHz.  The [frequency deviation actually used is
±75 kHz][0].  You
need at least 15 kHz of audio out of each of those channels,
so you need frequency information out of each of the PLLs at at least
like 30 ksps.  To decode [FM stereo][1], you need to decode oscillations
of the carrier frequency at up to 53 kHz, and thus your PLL needs to
give you a frequency readout at 106 ksps or more.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FM_broadcast_band#Deviation_and_bandpass
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FM_radio#FM_stereo

The frequency reported by the PLL is always in some sense an average
over some time period, and that’s what these numbers mean.  If it’s
“30 ksps” then the frequency needs to be able to slew from -75 kHz to
+75 kHz in 33 μs, a slew rate of 4.5 GHz/s, and the frequency can’t be
an average over much more than those 33 μs.  If it’s “106 ksps” then
it’s 16 GHz/s and 9.5 μs.  At 60 Msps, that’s averaging the
oscillation over 2000 samples for mono and 600 samples for stereo,
which seems eminently feasible.

This approach requires about 15 operations per sample per PLL, which
works out to some 400 operations per sample, 24 billion operations per
second.  It’s possible to implement this without any multiplies at
all.

Analyzing channels with a phase vocoder
---------------------------------------

An alternative to using PLLs might be to use a phase vocoder.  This
amounts to taking an STFT of the signal often enough to reliably
unwrap the phase — at least three times per cycle of the beat
frequency, say — with enough frequency resolution to have only one
sinusoid at most in each frequency bin.

As before, we need to divide the spectrum into frequency bins small
enough that at most one station is in each, but the FFT bins are
evenly spaced from 0 up to Nyquist, with one bin for every two samples
in the window.  We can’t choose the bin center frequencies freely the
way we could with the PLL approach.

If we use about 400 kHz spacing, then we need at least 52 frequency
bins, so at least 104 samples in the STFT window, say 128, which gives
us 64 frequency bins, ranging over 30 MHz if we’re at 60 Msps; this
gives us 468'750 Hz per bin.  But the windows can overlap by as much
as you want.

A somewhat tricky issue is that, in a phase vocoder, the rate at which
you need to inspect the phase of each bin is not determined by how
fast it is changing *frequency* (as in the PLL case), but by how fast
it is changing *phase*.  In a bin of 468-kHz width, the putative
partial in the bin can only vary by ±234 kHz from the bin center
frequency.  This means we need about 600'000 STFT windows per second,
which thus only overlap by 28 samples.

I think that, roughly speaking, this involves (7 = lg 128) · 2 · 5.1
multiplies per sample, which works out to 71, which means we need 4.3 billion
multiplications per second at 60 Msps.  This sounds feasible but very
challenging.  For a CPU, anyway; it should be easy for a GPU.

(Intel and NASoftware reported in 2011 that a 256-point call to the
VSIPL function `vsip_ccfftip_f`, which is probably not the fastest FFT
function for this since its input is complex, takes 440ns using AVX on
one core of a Core i7-2710QE when running at 2GHz, so it should in
fact be feasible on a modern CPU, if not on my laptop.  In the same
slide deck, they also report results on a Core i7-2715QE (?) as 23273
megaflops, which I guess means each FFT is 10240 operations, or 40
operations per sample, which is a lot more than the 16 multiplies I
was guessing.)

That
sounds almost an order of magnitude better than the PLL approach,
but it requires multiplies.  So it might turn out
that the approaches actually have similar efficiency in practice.

You might think to reduce computational load by using a smaller number
of STFTs per second.  But if you are using fewer STFTs of the same
size per second, without increasing the size of the STFTs, you lose
the ability to track frequencies near the edges of the bins; their
phases vary too fast to be unwrapped, and they alias into frequencies
closer to the center.  To avoid this, you must increase the size of
the STFTs exactly proportional to the reduction in the number of
windows you shingle each second with.  This almost exactly cancels out
the original reduction in computational load, *except* that now you
can decode more channels, *and* the logarithmic factor of the FFT
complexity increases.  So, for example, if you do 1024-sample STFTs
instead of 128-sample STFTs, you can decode 512 radio channels instead
of 64, at the cost of about 25% more computation.

This consideration suggests that, for a small number of channels, the
PLL approach should be more efficient, and for a large number of
channels, the FFT-based phase vocoder should be more efficient.  They
just happen to be about equal at about the number of channels that
exist in FM radio.