As I sat on the vibrating bus with my head leaning against its
vibrating window, trying to read text on my cellphone, I noticed that
the visual OTF induced by the vibration changed over time as the
relative phase of components of the vibration changed.  It occurred to
me that this may provide a feasible way to measure oscillations that
are too fast to measure directly or even rectify.

My vibrating head, vibrating because of the vibrating window, reduced
the text to mostly just a blur — the convolution of the true text
image with the path my eye was taking through each cycle of the
vibration.  If the path were an ellipse, I'd have seen just a blur and
little more; but in fact there were two or three copies of the text,
perfectly clear but overlapping, at spots in the vibration path where
my eye had temporarily come to rest.  But these copies moved as the
vibration changed.

Suppose you have an oscillation of some unknown frequency around 1 MHz
vibrating a mirror which is directing a focused laser beam at the
wall.  Without the vibration, the beam would draw a point; with the
vibration, it draws a line, which is brighter at the ends than in the
middle, because the beam spends more time at the ends.  In particular
there are singularities of maximum brightness at the ends of the line,
like caustics, because the beam actually becomes stationary there.
You can see these phenomena with your eyes even though the
oscillations are four orders of magnitude too fast for your eyes to
see them.  They allow you to measure the amplitude of the vibration,
at least if you have calibrated the mirror, but not its frequency.
They give you some information about the shape of the waveform — how
much time it spends at each height — but not in what order.

Now, maybe this is not the best example, because in real life, you
could vibrate the mirror in the other axis with a lower-frequency
signal, say 100 kHz, and observe the Lissajous pattern; you could
adjust the frequency of the reference signal until the Lissajous
pattern was stable, although this might be very challenging to do by
hand — to get the Lissajous pattern to be shifting at less than 50 Hz,
your harmonic frequency needs to be within 50 Hz of the unknown
signal.  But let’s suppose you have only one dimension to work with,
and that the unknown signal is very spectrally pure.

If you add a 100-kHz reference signal to the displacement in the same
axis, the pattern of bright and dark in the line projected on the wall
will change.  If the unknown frequency is a precise multiple of the
reference, it will produce a stable pattern of bright and dark — in
particular, at the points where the sum wave has zero derivative, you
have more of those bright singularities that previously appeared only
at the ends of the line.  If the reference signal has a small enough
amplitude, there will be 20 of them, but as the reference signal
amplitude increases relative to the higher-frequency unknown signal,
more and more of these singularities will disappear.

If the harmonic relation is imperfect, this will manifest as a
continuous phase shift between the reference frequency and the unknown
frequency, with the bright spots moving around; just as with a
Lissajous figure, the speed of this phase shift tells you the precise
difference in frequency.

(This is related to file `ccd-oscilloscope`, which concerns a
different and much simpler way to measure fast signals with slow
sensors.)

