I was thinking about soldering irons, temperature controlled high-end
soldering irons and primitive ones consisting of a chunk of metal
heated in a propane torch, and phase-change materials, and it occurred
to me that with a phase-change material, you could get very tight
temperature control of the primitive kind of soldering iron heated in
a propane torch — perhaps very useful for `ghettobotics`.

Soldering
---------

Electronics soldering requires heating the junction to the melting
point of the solder — 183° for 63–37 tin–lead solder, according to
file `filled-fdm` and Wikipedia’s [soldering article]. To achieve
this, the soldering iron has to be hotter than 183°, because if the
iron is at 183°, it would take infinite time for the joint to reach
183°, even in a perfectly insulated vacuum; in a situation where
you’re losing heat to radiation and air, it will never reach it.  So
the iron needs to be hotter than the temperature needed at the junction.

But the junction can’t get too far above the melting temperature, in
order to reduce damage to the electronic components.  Traditional
through-hole leaded packages were only connected to the solder joint
with a thin copper wire, but surface-mount components are often
entirely leadless, and so experience much faster heat flow from the
joint.  So it’s important for the iron not to be *too* hot.

Wikipedia’s [reflow soldering article] tells me that normal reflow
temperatures are 20°–40° above the solder’s “liquidus” (the high end
of the melting temperature range).

Thermostat-controlled soldering irons are now becoming
standard — because the necessary electronics are now much cheaper than
the rest of the iron, because of the trickier nature of surface-mount
soldering, and because the higher temperatures required for lead-free
solder leave less room for error.  The other advantage they have,
aside from not overheating, is that their tips don’t cool down when
you touch them to a joint; the iron kicks up the current to compensate
for the heat loss, which is an enormous help when you’re trying to
desolder a power transistor from a big ground pour.

Eutectic tin–silver–copper solder melts at 217° and thus requires
higher soldering temperatures.  Other lead-free solders are in the
211°–227° range, including tin–copper, tin–silver,
tin–silver–copper–zinc, and tin–silver–copper–manganese.

[reflow soldering article]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reflow
[soldering article]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solder

A can of phase-change alloy as a heat reservoir
-----------------------------------------------

Phase-change materials serve as reservoirs of heat over the relatively
narrow temperature range of their phase change — in the case of
melting, the range between the solidus and liquidus.

For a eutectic, the liquidus and solidus are equal.  By adding more of
one or the other metal to the eutectic, the liquidus is increased
while the solidus remains unchanged; in between, the equilibrium state
is a slush with crystals enriched in the excess ingredient mixed with
a liquid eutectic.  So, for example, 70–30 tin–lead solder has the
same 183° solidus as the eutectic, but its liquidus is 193°, and 40–60
tin–lead solder (60% lead) has an even higher liquidus of 247°, which
is actually higher than the liquidus of pure tin at 231.93°.

Suppose you have 10 mℓ of 40–60 tin–lead sealed in a container, perhaps
one made of 400-μm-thick copper flash-plated with nickel and then
plated with, say, 10 μm of iron, the way soldering-iron tips are made.
If you heat the container to 247°, the contents will be entirely
liquid; if you allow it to cool uniformly to 183°, the contents will
have entirely solidified.  For its density, let’s say 9 g/cc, since
molten lead is 10.7 g/cc, room-temperature lead is 11.3 g/cc, and
molten tin is 7.0 g/cc, so this is about 90 g of molten metal, which
will yield up its heat of fusion as it solidifies; I don’t know what
the eutectic’s is, but lead’s is 4.77 kJ/mol (= 23.0 J/g) and tin’s is
7.03 kJ/mol (= 59.2 J/g), so let’s suppose the mix is somewhere around
20 J/g; that gives us 1800 J of heat released through this transition.
(Plus the small amount of sensible heat from the 60° temperature
change, about 0.2 J/g/K (lead being 0.129 and tin being 0.227), adding
another 18 J.)

A typical non-temperature-controlled hand [soldering iron] is 15–30 W,
although soldering guns are commonly 150 W.  1800 J at 150 W is 12
seconds of soldering; at 30 W it’s 60 seconds of soldering.

[soldering iron]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soldering_iron

So you could heat up such a reservoir (with fire or whatever) and then
solder with it for a few seconds to minutes while it stays hot enough
to melt tin–lead solder — up to a total mass of solder similar to the
45 g it contains — or a shorter time while it remains hot enough to
melt lead-free solder.

Since solidified solder is a much poorer conductor of heat than
[copper] (401 W/m/K for copper, vs. 35.3 W/m/K for [lead], 66.8 W/m/K
for [tin], so solder is probably somewhere in that neighborhood), some
copper bars inside the can might be useful in conducting heat from its
interior to its surface.  In the other direction, some fiberglass or
porous ceramic around the can might be useful in preventing heat loss
through other than the tip.

[Copper]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copper
[lead]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lead
[tin]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tin

How big a reservoir can you reasonably hold?
--------------------------------------------

I have one of those goofy multicolored ballpoint pens, with eight
sliders near the back end to select the color.  It’s comfortable to
use, but it’s toward the chunky end of what’s comfortable; it’s about
17 mm in diameter and 130 mm long, and the tip curves down to a cone
of about 60° included angle; so its total volume is about 30
milliliters.

Electric soldering irons are normally held much further from the tip,
which I assume is because the old thermostat-less type only had its
temperature limited by losing heat to the air; if they had only a
little area exposed, then they could only use a very small amount of
power, and consequently would heat up slowly and require very low duty
cycles.  But this would seem to be unnecessary with any kind of
thermal regulation.  Certainly it is possible to insulate the iron
sufficiently that you can grasp it quite near the tip, and this would
be advantageous.  So this pen is probably a reasonable way to estimate
the comfortable volume that can be used for a phase-change soldering
iron.

However, if my estimate of solder’s density above is in the ballpark,
a reservoir of 30 mℓ would weigh some 270 g — in folk units, nearly a
pound.  Finely manipulating such a heavy reservoir would probably tire
the hand before long (I did a brief test with a half-full 600mℓ
plastic coke bottle, and found fatigue but no diminution of
dexterity), so most likely the reservoir-based iron should be smaller
than this.

Phase-change alloy choice
-------------------------

If you only wanted to solder traditional tin–lead solder, maybe
instead of a 40–60 tin–lead phase-change reservoir which needs to be
heated up to 247° to be fully melted, you should use 70–30 tin–lead,
which is fully melted at 193°.  This gives you a much more precise
temperature, dramatically reducing the maximum temperature the
delicate electronic components can reach — but the temperature is a
bit low, meaning that heat flow will be slow, and this can actually
increase the risk to the components by giving them too much time to
heat up.

Better choices for tin–lead soldering might include Sn 89%, Zn 8%, Bi
3% (191°–198°), which has the advantage of being entirely
non-precious-metal; Pb 60%, In 40% (195°–225°); the tin–zinc eutectic
Sn 91%, Zn 9% (199°); and the near-eutectic ternary alloy Sn 86.9%, In
10%, Ag 3.1% (204°–205°), which is 87% non-precious-metal.  (Indium
and silver are about the same price.)  For lead-free soldering, pure
tin (232°, as I said above) or the tin–silver eutectic (3.5% silver,
221°) might be the best phase-change material.

Hot-oil soldering for larger reservoirs and higher powers
---------------------------------------------------------

As described in file `hot-oil-cutter`, you can heat a thin pipe to a
consistent high temperature by pumping hot oil through it; as
described in file `coolants`, sunflower oil, glycerin, and mineral oil
are all liquid and fairly stable at the temperatures under discussion
as well as at room temperature.  So you could perhaps maintain a large
“solder pot” partly molten, with a thick coolant pipe serpentining
through it to carry off the heat of fusion, connected to a thinner
coolant pipe to heat the iron tip.  However, this is probably more
elaborate than a thermostatically-controlled electric tip would be, so
probably isn’t justified.

Thermal conductivity; a steel can is fine
-----------------------------------------

I suggested above using a thin can of copper to hold the phase-change
alloy, but that’s probably unnecessary; a thick can of steel would
surely work just as well, and would be cheaper, stronger, stiffer, and
not at risk of dissolving in the phase-change medium.  As mentioned
above, copper’s thermal conductivity is 401 W/m/K, so sending 150 W
through a 400-μm wall with a 20° temperature difference would require
a 3.8-millimeter-diameter circle of wall with an area of 7.5 mm²; this
is about the diameter of a soldering tip, so you could reasonably just
expose a conical tip of the can as the soldering tip.  That’s the only
part of the can that would need to be copper, though.

A more sensible approach, though, is to use a separate conical
solid-copper tip to conduct the heat, which communicates with the can
through a much larger contact area, at which point the can itself can
be steel — despite its lower thermal conductivity (80.4 W/m/K for
iron), the can is no longer contributing the majority of the thermal
resistance.  This also makes it practical to use the plated copper-bar
or plated copper-sheet conductors mentioned earlier to conduct heat
out of the center of the can.

[iron]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron

Copper bars?  Nah, maybe heat pipes?
------------------------------------

Earlier I talked about using copper bars to conduct the heat from the
midst of the solidifying reservoir to the tip where it is used,
because of copper’s five-times-higher thermal conductivity.  Thinking
about conducting heat lengthwise through a long cylinder, if the
copper is to conduct more heat than the rest of the reservoir
contents — much less *far* more heat — it needs to have at least a
fifth of the cross-sectional area.  That suggests that, for example,
if a cylindrical reservoir is to have a diameter of 15 mm, the copper
bar must have a diameter of 6.7 mm.  That’s not enough to make the
idea impractical, but it’s a fucking hell of a lot of copper.

Consider, though, the total power we can get.  Suppose my reservoir is
100 mm long and 17 mm in diameter, a bit smaller than the multicolored
pen mentioned earlier.  If nearly all of it is filled with a massive
copper bar, the most heat we can get from the middle of it to the end
at a ΔT of 20 K is 401 (W/m/K) · 20 K · 2π(8½ mm)² / (50 mm) = 72 W.
This is barely adequate, and becomes less so once more realistic
amounts of copper are considered.

Materials are known with higher heat conductivity than copper.  They
are silver, diamond, carbon nanotubes, and graphene.  At present none
of these is a practicable alternative.

A possible alternative is the “heat pipe”, called by Wollaston, its
inventor, the “cryophorus”.  This is an elongated, evacuated chamber,
with a little liquid coolant in equilibrium with its vapor, in modern
realizations with a wick to carry the liquid throughout the system.
When one end of the chamber is cooler than the other, the vapor
condenses at that end, lowering the pressure until the liquid
vaporizes equally fast at the other; with the wick, this is an endless
cycle.  Because the vapor carrying the enthalpy of vaporization from
one end to the other moves bodily through space, it can travel
considerably faster than heat diffusing through a body — the heat
transfer power is almost independent of the distance the heat must be
transferred.

Most often, heat pipes are used near room temperature and employ water
as the coolant; in theory, this works from water’s triple point at
0.01° up to its critical point at about 374°, but as I understand it,
water is normally only used up to about 200°, perhaps to avoid
dangerously high pressures.

Heat pipes don’t suffer from the drawbacks of the hot-oil approach
mentioned earlier, in that they don’t need any pumping and don’t
contain any moving parts.

Alternatively, perhaps a much shorter, more bulbous heat reservoir
could enable mere copper to deliver the heat adequately.