Neal Stephenson's _The Diamond Age_ famously speculates on a future
society dominated by tribal groups like the Ashanti Nation and the
Neo-Victorians, nations whose members live distributed around the
world rather than within a single territory.  In the novel, Stephenson
calls these tribal groups "phyles".  What might phyles look like in
the real 21st century?

Current protophyles
-------------------

The case of the United States of America is interesting.  The USA
(population 300 million) is one of the few nation-states — perhaps the
only one — which levies income tax on non-resident citizens, although
currently only those with particularly high incomes.  As a sort of
compensation for this, a US passport makes it easy to travel to most
of the world's territory, even obtaining work visas in many places;
and in many cases, the US Embassy or Consulate will intervene if a US
citizen encounters legal trouble or needs legal help in a foreign
country.  Additionally, the US military forces, consisting of some 1.5
million people, occupy parts of about 25 other countries†.  In part
because of these factors, some 3–6 million of the world's 200 million
expatriates are US citizens[0].

[0]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_diaspora

† The US has military deployments in some 150 countries, which is
nearly all of them, but only the US and Afghanistan have over 100 000
US troops; only those countries and Germany have over 50 000; only
those countries, South Korea, and Japan have over 20 000; only those
countries, Italy, and Kuwait have over 10 000; only those countries
and the UK have over 5000; only those countries and Australia have
over 2000; and only those countries and Belgium, Spain, Turkey, and
Bahrain have over 1000 US troops.

The case of the Romani is also interesting, largely by contrast.  The
Romani, unlike the USA, control no territory, and have controlled no
territory for some 700 to 1000 years; but they are bound together not
just by a language (with some two million speakers) and social
customs, but also a separate, parallel justice system, the
kris-romani.  (The kris originated within the Vlax Romani, and has
spread to some parts of the Romani diaspora influenced by the Vlax.)
The Romani have suffered conflicts with much more populous indigenous
peoples during their centuries living in Europe, including mass
enslavement, mass killings, childhood kidnapping, mass deportation
(most recently in France in 2009 and 2010), and so on, but also
including day-to-day discrimination.

Perhaps their position vis-a-vis such events could be improved by
better coordination in order to negotiate with national governments
collectively.  Imagine, for example, if France recognized the Romani
as a sovereign state; the 2010 mass deportations of Romani which
provoked no particular reaction from Bulgaria and Romania, to which
the Romani were deported.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, also known as the
Mormon Church, is a worldwide organization of some 14 million people,
more than a third of whom live in the US.  Some one-third of this
number are "active" members.  They tithe, in general, 10% of their
income to the church, a centrally controlled hierarchy, which prepares
its plans to establish a worldwide theodemocratic government after the
predicted collapse of secular government in the days before the Second
Coming of Christ.  Members who do not tithe cannot enter the temple,
even to attend weddings of family members.  The church's net worth is
estimated at US$30 billion.  Most people born into Mormon families
remain Mormon, and nearly all male Mormons spend two years
proselytizing overseas in the care and 24–7 surveillance of the
church, funded by their own money, an experience which strengthens
their bonds to the church; at any given time, some 50 000 Mormons are
missionaries in this way, at some 340 missions throughout the world.
As a result of this proselytism, the church is still doubling in size
every 15–20 years.  In addition to the 50 000 missionaries, the church
has some 100 000 other volunteers.

Among other services, church maintains a "bishop's storehouse", which
provides goods to poor people in exchange for service to the church;
in theory, these goods are available to non-Mormons as well.

The church's earlier attempts to assume temporal authority in the
1830s through 1858 resulted in wars with the USA and the assassination
of its founders.  Until 1927, the church's "endowment" ceremony,
required of its missionaries and those who would wed in the church,
included an oath to "pray to Almighty God to avenge the blood of the
prophets upon this nation".

Dubai is a sort of inverse case: 80% of Dubai's population consists of
expatriates, who do not enjoy the rights of citizenship in Dubai.  The
UAE in general does not recognize *jus soli* citizenship, so
citizenship in Dubai is a sort of inherited élite status
distinguishing a powerful indigenous upper class from a large class of
people who, by birth, have diminished legal rights.

The Roman Catholic Church is, in some sense, the remnant of the
Western Roman Empire.  It operates a worldwide hierarchy with a
variety of relationships with other sovereign states; sometimes its
local leaders ("bishops" or "archbishops") are supported by local
governments, chosen in part by local governments, or both, and
sometimes not.  It has territorial control over only a single square
mile, the Vatican City.

Triads?

Freemasons?

<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2013/07/bart-strike-shows-privatizations-dark-side.html>
talks about the upper class abandoning public transit in the Bay Area:

> In the Bay Area, many high-earners have already moved on to what
  amounts to a private services grid. They get to work on corporate
  shuttles, go out at night using Uber or Lyft cars, and use services
  like Seamless to bring food and other necessities to them. They've
  accepted the public sector's dysfunction as a given, and they've
  already abandoned it for most basic services.

The CEO of Avego strenuously objects in the comments to being lumped
in with luxury services like taxis and Uber:

> Avego allows people to carpool together and share the cost of the
  ride. The only thing Avego is doing is providing efficiency and
  reducing the cost of commuting for both rider and driver. Is this a
  bad thing? In fact, BART costs the average rider $0.35 per mile
  (that's their pricing model, if I remember correctly). It's not a
  particularly cheap network to begin with, although I grant you, it's
  a great system and San Francisco needs it and I love the good public
  transport San Francisco has, in general.
 
> But you say Avego could never afford to charge less that the Public
  Transit system? In fact, the Avego network does (unlike the Ubers
  and Lyfts and others, which do cost about 5-7x higher than public
  transit). The cost works out to about $0.20 per mile, below BART's
  own rate.
 
> It's a little naive to think that technology necessarily makes
  things more expensive. In Avego's case, we're dramatically lowering
  the cost of the commute, and, particularly in these difficult
  economic times, cutting waste and reducing people's cost of living
  while also improving their quality of life counts for a net win.

<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/18/technology/financial-times-site-is-hacked.html?pagewanted=all&_r=3&>
describes the Syrian government's arm's-length relationships with
computer crackers who advocate its cause, similar to what Myhrvold was
talking about in his Strategic Terrorism paper.

<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2013/07/if-your-government-fails-can-you-create-a-new-one-with-your-phone/278216/>
has lots of interesting points about supplementing states with ad-hoc
smart mobs, such as:

> But when states fail to deliver governance goods, communities
  increasingly will step up, digitally. This shouldn't be surprising,
  given how much excitement there is around the prospect that
  e-government will significantly improve the capacity of even rich
  governments to deliver services. However, what we're talking about
  here is about more than service delivery: it is about the capacity
  of communities to set rules, stick to them, and sanction the people
  who break the rules. A sovereign state is one that can implement and
  enforce policies. When states don't have these capacities, a growing
  number of communities use digital media to not only provide
  services, but to do so in a way that amounts to the implementation
  and enforcement of new policies.
  