You should be able to engrave permanent images on metal or glass using
a ceramic or metal stylus on a flexing piezoelectric arm with no
joints, somewhat similar to the needle of an STM or AFM.  Aluminum
oxide (sapphire) is probably the easiest ceramic to use, although it
provides no electrically-conductive feedback about contact; metal
(hardened tool steel, say), or conductive ceramics like tungsten
carbide, would remedy that shortcoming, allowing sensitive calibration
of engraving depth.

The total movement range of such a setup is likely very small, in the
neighborhood of a millimeter, but it can potentially micro-forge the
surface of the metal with sub-nanometer resolution, enabling the
direct engraving of holograms.  I’m not sure what it will do on glass,
but I think it’s possible to get it to make scratches rather than just
break the glass.

To take a random example, the [American Piezo catalog][0] lists a “PSt
150/5x5/7” osi-type piezoelectric stack actuator of 5 mm × 5 mm, 9 mm
long, with a maximum stroke of “13/9” μm (not sure what’s up with the
two numbers), 800 nF capacitance, resonant frequency of 100 kHz,
120 N/μm of stiffness, 1600 N of blocking force, with a maximum load
of 2000 N, operating from -30 V to +150 V.  If you hook up three of
these things in parallel to a chunk of metal with a grain of aluminum
oxide on its tip, they could jam that grain 9 μm into a bit of
aluminum, titanium, glass, or even steel, pull it back out, move it
into a different position, jam it back in, and repeat, at 25 kHz (two
octaves below resonant) without any difficulty.

[0]: https://www.americanpiezo.com/images/stories/content_images/pdf/apc_multilayer_catalog.pdf

If the chunk of metal has a 10:1 aspect ratio, for example if the
piezo actuators are attached to it 20 mm apart and it’s 200 mm long,
then you can wave that little grain of sapphire back and forth by
90 μm, almost the width of a hair.  Some kind of flexure-lever
arrangement to amplify this by another factor of 10 might be a good
idea.

You could presumably engrave data on a little spot at about 50 kbps in
this way.  (They also offer flat chip actuators with a shorter stroke
but much higher resonant frequency, like 500 kHz.)  But then you would
probably need some kind of repeatable positioning apparatus to engrave
over a wider area.

The pressure generated is enormous.  Supposing that the tip is up to
25 μm in diameter, 1600 N spread over 490 square microns is
3.3 terapascals.  Different metals have yield stresses in the range of
90 MPa (copper) to 2.5 GPa (piano wire), with around 500 MPa being
normal; this is 6600 times lower.  (Actually annealed aluminum is down
around 15–20 MPa.)  Sapphire’s ultimate tensile strength is only
around 1.9 GPa, and diamond only 2.8.

(Oops, actually the force and pressure from the actuator is
potentially 3× that if you have three parallel actuators.)

So you really could find a way to gear these actuators up by a
factor of 1000 or so, it would give you a stroke of 9 mm with
potentially nanometer precision, and still plenty of force to engrave
the surface.  (I suppose this is why normal STMs use bending
actuators.)  If you could still manage 50 kbps, although this seems
more dubious, you could engrave a 9 mm square area at 500-nm
resolution at 0.0125 mm² per second, filling the whole area in about
two hours.  This is a good timescale.

Unfortunately, at least the [Physikinstrumente devices][1] that gear
up piezoelectric actuators in such a fashion have much lower resonant
frequencies, like 150 Hz.

[1]: https://www.physikinstrumente.com/en/products/piezoceramic-actuators/linear-actuators/p-602-piezomove-high-stiffness-linear-piezo-actuator-202700/

As an alternative, maybe you could use electromagnetics, which can
also reach up into the MHz range.