So I’ve been reading through the FullPliant website.


Summary
-------

Pliant is a programming language that represents an exploration of a
promising but underexplored corner of the language design space.  It
has static typing with a frequently used escape hatch to ad-hoc
polymorphism, like Java, but with minimal, extensible syntax, like
Tcl, Forth, or to a lesser extent, Ruby, Scheme, or Common Lisp.  It
uses ref counting.

In more detail: the author, Hubert Tonneau, clearly has an
unreasonably high opinion of himself, but the system he’s built seems
reasonably efficient; it’s not quite the full operating system he
makes it out to be, but it’s pretty close.  He’s built a text editor;
an IDE; a compiler; a graphical user interface all the way down to raw
pixels; a database; a web page framework; servers for SMTP, HTTP, and
VNC RFB; a bandwidth-optimized GUI remoting protocol; a compiler; and
a sampling profiler.  The programming language is syntactically close
to being a Lisp with some syntax sugar and macros, but it’s explicitly
and statically typed, allowing a relatively simple compiler to get
good performance.  Memory management uses reference counting or,
optionally, explicit malloc and free.  The database is an IMS-like
hierarchical database, with a modern
disk-as-tape-for-the-transaction-log design.  The system is poorly
documented, but it appears that the language has both first-class
functions and dynamic method dispatch.

The main compiler is written in Pliant, bootstrapped from a subset
written in C.

This seems like a pretty reasonable overall design for the stuff he’s
trying to do, and it seems to be reasonably successful.  The
signal-to-noise ratio of the example code below is very high.

I wish there were documentation in French, as Tonneau’s English is
very poor, and although the existing documentation comes out to book
length (I’ve been reading it for days), it’s quite sketchy at best.

Tonneau is only casually familiar with the literature and related work
in the field, so he has reinvented a number of things.


Syntax and Embedded DSLs in Pliant
----------------------------------

One of the more interesting features of Pliant is how he uses the
macro system and syntactic sugar to get Ruby-like DSL power for things
like the GUI; here’s a snippet of an example from the manual:

    var Float total := 0
    each a o:article
      row
        cell
          input "" a:ref
        hook
          cell
            input "" a:ppu
          cell
            input "" a:count
        change
          section_replay "content"
        cell
          text (String a:count*a:ppu)
          total += a:count*a.ppu
        cell
          button "remove"
            o:article delete keyof:a
            section_replay "content"

Pliant’s syntax is extensible, so this code can take advantage of
Ruby-like blocks passed to macros.  It builds a table with the
price-per-unit and count cells wrapped in an on-change hook.  Even for
ordinary functions rather than macros, the argument semantics permit
by-reference in-out parameters, so the `input` control can be hooked
directly to the database record field with a minimum of fuss.
`section_replay` re-executes the code block to draw the named
“section” of the UI, which, as it happens, includes the code snippet
above.  That implies closure semantics; see below.

The `each` macro is not specific to the database module, but in this
case is iterating over a database query result; as you can imagine, it
declares the variable `a` provided as its first argument, and iterates
over the subordinate records in `o:article`.

The whole infix and indentation syntax thing is just syntax sugar over
S-expressions; part of the code above is, I think, syntactic sugar for
the following S-expression in conventional notation:

    (cell ({} (text (String (* (a count) (a ppu))))
              (+= total (* (a count) (a ppu)))))

The syntax is perhaps unfortunately so minimalistic that I haven’t yet
figured out how to tell when a bareword will be evaluated as a
variable and when it will be treated as a symbol, even in contexts
where the head of the clause is clearly a variable and not a macro
name.  Here, for example, `total` is a variable, but `count` and `ppu`
are names of methods to call.  I don’t know if defining methods
creates a variable in the environment that refers to the corresponding
generic function or what.

Pliant macros (“meta functions”) are not source-to-source
transformations; rather, they emit the compiler’s intermediate
representation for their part of the AST, possibly after incorporating
the IR from their child nodes.  Tonneau argues that this makes them
more orthogonally composable than Lisp macros, but the complexity cost
in the implementation of each macro is high, and I am not convinced of
his thesis as its benefits.

As an example, Tonneau explains the `thread` macro in the manual.  To
implement the closure semantic required (similar to those of `button`)
it invokes the compiler function `uses` on the emitted IR from the
child nodes to determine which variables must be closed over, then
explicitly creates code to copy the variable contents into the child
thread.  I have no idea how that interacts with the optional reference
counting machinery.


Pointer semantics in Pliant
---------------------------

Reference counting in Pliant depends on the use of smart-pointer
classes like Arrow and Link, which are instantiated with the type of
their targets; I think this makes them parametrically polymorphic, but
because the type system is never explained anywhere, I’m not sure.

The usual kinds of pointers in Pliant are implicitly dereferenced;
they are transparent references to the underlying variable, and
support the same operations as a variable of the underlying type,
including `:=`, plus a separate `:>` operation which reseats it to
point to a different value.  They can refer to variables inside
arrays, dictionaries, and other containers, and they can even be used
as iterators in something like the C++ style, but address arithmetic
is not normal.  An example from the manual of iterating over the
elements of a dictionary with key elements of some type xxx mapped to
value elements of some type yyy:

    var (Dictionary xxx yyy) d
    var Pointer:yyy p
    p :> d first
    while exists:p
        foo p
        p :> d next p

This is equivalent to this use of `each`:

    var (Dictionary xxx yyy) d
    each p d
        foo p

There’s a separate `Address` type that does support address
arithmetic, requires an explicit dereferencing operation, and carries
no target type.

Implicit dereferencing clearly poses problems for manipulating pointer
chains; there’s a `:>>` operation to reseat the second (or possibly
ultimate) pointer in such a chain.

I speculate that the implicit nature of Pliant dereferencing is
helpful to making embedded DSLs.


Runtime error handling in Pliant
--------------------------------

Pliant has a little-used exception system.  By default, it indicates
errors through abrupt termination of the Pliant process; file I/O
operations also have a `safe` option to instead use function return
values.  There is no apparent support for Golang-like multiple return
values with compiler warnings on unused variables, nor for
Haskell-like variant types with pattern matching.

When an exception is caught, the exception system does not immediately
transfer control to the error handler; it appears to continue
execution normally with a pending error stored somewhere, indicated by
the `iserror` boolean function.

There is syntactic sugar for propagating exceptions; an equivalent to
the

    foo bar
    if iserror
        return

is

    foo bar ?

Abrupt process termination provides a source-level stack trace.

I said the exception system was little-used, but it is used
consistently in some places.  In particular the `compile` method on
AST nodes normally indicates compile errors using exceptions.


Reference Counting and Dynamic Dispatch in Pliant
-------------------------------------------------

Any Pliant variable can be an “object”, with a header containing a
reference count (which I suppose implies it must be heap-allocated)
and a type pointer, or not.  Various parts of the Pliant machinery
assume that they are operating on objects, and this is sometimes
verified at compile time.  The `Link` smart pointer type has the
semantics of `Pointer`, plus increments and decrements reference
counts, and the `Arrow` smart pointer type is the analogous
reference-counted version of `Address`.

Reference counting in Pliant is apparently thread-safe.  I don’t know
whether this makes it a bottleneck in heavily multithreaded code.

I don’t understand the semantics of method calls and dynamic dispatch
much at all.

The type pointer can be accessed with the `entry_type` function for
dynamic type tests.


The Pliant database
-------------------

The Pliant database is made of typed records arranged in a tree; some
of the fields can be multivalued, and their values have another record
type, as in older hierarchical databases like IMS.  I haven’t found
anything permitting polymorphic record types or indices.

Tonneau admits that the database’s hierarchical design is less
flexible than an RDBMS, but considers it adequate.  His idea of
RDBMSes is pretty hazy; he thinks they autonomously decide which
indices to create.

I don’t know what the database’s transaction semantics are.
