I just wrote this long thing in `glass-fluxing-3d-printing` about a
powder-bed 3-D printing technique that deposits a binder that’s
completely inert at room temperature, but upon firing the print in a
kiln, becomes active.

I think there are a variety of other possibilities in powder-bed 3-D
printing that have not yet been fully explored.

Magnesium oxychloride Sorel cement
----------------------------------

[Sorel cement][0] is a combination of highly water-soluble [magnesium
chloride][1] (nigari) with highly water-insoluble [magnesium oxide][2]
(milk of magnesia); it’s a cement similar to Portland cement, but more
refractory, less water-resistant (and won’t harden underwater), and
nearly twice as strong.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorel_cement
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnesium_chloride
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periclase

So, although I’d have to investigate more, I think you could use an
aqueous solution of magnesium chloride to moisten a powder bed of sand
and dry magnesium oxide to form a very strong mortar.

Selective hammering
-------------------

Instead of squirting binders onto a powder bed like an inkjet printer,
you could bang the shit out of it with hammers like a dot-matrix
printer, ideally under vacuum so that you don’t generate explosive gas
expulsions.  The impact will stick together the particles in the
vicinity, affecting a total mass of powder material similar to the
total mass of the hammer.  (This suggests that low-mass hammers are in
some sense optimal.)

Selective electrical sintering
------------------------------

For beds of metal particles, instead of squirting binders, you could
touch the surface of the powder with an electrode and drive a large
current into it, sintering the nearby particles together through joule
heating of their contact points, like an old-fashioned [coherer][3].

[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coherer

The electrode would probably have to be a carbon rod, since any other
plausible material is likely to stop working due to surface oxidation.

This probably won’t produce a strongly bonded part, but might be
enough to produce a solid part that can then be solidified further by
other means.

Cross-linking with calcium or other polyvalent cations for cement precipitation
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A number of anions, such as phosphate, carbonate, and alginate, form water-soluble
compounds with monovalent cations like those of the alkali metals
(sodium, potassium) and ammonium, while forming water-insoluble compounds with
divalent cations like those of the alkaline earth metals (calcium,
magnesium).  Calcium and magnesium also have highly water-soluble
salts, such as their nontoxic chlorides.  Phosphate is also
water-soluble in the form of phosphoric acid.

This means that by mixing two liquids you can precipitate a solid
through a [double ion replacement reaction][4].  This is used in
[molecular gastronomy spherification][5] of foods, forming a flexible
calcium alginate membrane around a liquid center with sodium alginate
dissolved in it.

[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salt_metathesis_reaction
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spherification

(I’m pretty sure this is because these anions are polyvalent and are
strongly enough bonded to their cations that they are solvated
together with them, rather than separately, so that once the cations
are also polyvalent, the individual anions floating around with their
individual cation harems are replaced by endless chains in which each
cation links together different anions.  But I’m no chemist.)

Other polyvalent cations, like Cu₂₊, Zn₂₊, Fe₃₊, and Fe₂₊, should also
work for this.  Most of these also have relatively innocuous
water-soluble salts; ZnCl₂, Fe(NO₃)₃, Cu(NO₃)₂, FeCl₃, as well as
blue, white, and green vitriol, of course, which last are innocuous
enough to use as nutritional supplements, but are subject to onerous
reporting paperwork in places nowadays; acetates of calcium,
magnesium, copper, zinc, and ferrous iron (II) are also all soluble,
though zinc only a bit, and ferric iron (III) not at all.  Ferrous
citrate is also soluble.

So the plan is that you precipitate a solid cement in the interstices
of an aggregate or filler, such as quartz, carbon black, fumed silica,
chopped carbon fiber, chopped basalt fiber, powdered graphite,
powdered copper, powdered silver, hollow glass spheres, hollow steel
spheres, chopped cellulose fiber (such as sawdust), clay, or a
mixture.  Different possible resulting cements include the following;
I’m including Mohs hardnesses as an imprecise but readily available
and roughly accurate guide to strength:

- Calcium phosphate — probably hydroxyapatite, like tooth enamel, Mohs
  hardness 5; can incorporate iron(II) and manganese substituting
  freely for calcium to form the equally hard graftonite;
- Calcium carbonate — calcite, Mohs hardness 3;
- Calcium alginate — a silicone-like insoluble, nontoxic organic
  water-gel-forming elastomer;
- Ammonium magnesium phosphate — the light, very soft (Mohs ≤ 2)
  mineral struvite, which might be formed if ammonium phosphate is the
  phosphate salt used;
- Magnesium phosphate is a GRAS food additive for buffering acidity,
  but I don’t know anything about its mechanical properties;
- Magnesium carbonate — the soft mineral magnesite, Mohs hardness
  3.5–4.5, which can be calcined at only 500–800° to magnesium oxide,
  or magnesia alba ([periclase][2], as mentioned above), which doesn’t
  melt until 2852° and is used as a stronger alternative to gypsum in
  drywall;
- Calcium magnesium carbonate — the mineral dolomite, Mohs 3.5–4,
  which probably will *not* form even if its constituents are
  available (because it’s picky about crystallizing);
- Magnesium alginate ought to exist and be similar to calcium
  alginate;
- Copper phosphate — a blue-to-green insoluble copper salt;
- Copper carbonate — a bright blue to green pigment, depending on
  degree of hydration, occurring as malachite and azurite in nature
  (which differ in their degree of carbonation); “very sensitive to
  acids”.  Mohs 3.5–4.
- Zinc phosphate — one of the oldest and most widely used dental
  cements, so nontoxic and biocompatible, made in something like the
  way I’m suggesting here (mixing zinc oxide and magnesium oxide
  powder with buffered aqueous phosphoric acid); occurs naturally as
  the rare mineral hopeite (Mohs 3–3.5);
- Zinc carbonate — the mineral smithsonite (Mohs 4.5), one of the two
  minerals known as calamine;
- Ferric phosphate — non-toxic, except to mollusks, and sometimes used
  as an iron nutritional supplement, so presumably somewhat
  water-soluble; “heterosite” or “wolfeite”?
- Ferrous phosphate — the soft deep blue to bluish green mineral
  vivianite, used to kill garden slugs, Mohs 1.5–2;
- Iron carbonate — the dense yellow mineral siderite, Mohs 3.75–4.25;
- Manganese carbonate — the rose-red mineral rhodochrosite, Mohs 3.5–4.

So you should be able to get relatively high strength, almost as high
as portland cement (whose strength comes mainly from belite, which is
known as larnite in nature, Mohs 6), by precipitating calcium
phosphate crystals from a water-soluble calcium salt such as calcium
chloride and a water-soluble phosphate salt such as monoammonium
phosphate; you *may* be able to get a highly refractory bond by
calcining the phosphate or carbonate of magnesium into magnesia; you
can get an instant nontoxic aqueous elastomeric gel with calcium
alginate; you can get biocompatibility (and guaranteed working
recipes) from zinc and magnesium oxides with buffered aqueous
phosphoric acid; and there are thirteen other combinations that will
probably work as well.

Further alternative polycations might include nickel, mercury, and
vanadium ions, but these have some disadvantages (carcinogenicity,
higher toxicity) and not much in the way of available information.
Further alternative polyanions might include sulfate (which does have
some insoluble salts, notably calcium sulfate (gypsum) and barium
sulfate), oxalate, silicate (see below), sulfide (soluble with
lithium, sodium, and ammonium, but should precipitate transition
metals) and perhaps some carrageenans.

Iron sulfide in particular — fool’s gold — is 6–6.5 on the Mohs scale,
harder than apatite.  It has the disadvantage of gradually oxidizing
in air, though, with corrosive results, and of course the soluble
sulfides are toxic.

It may be desirable to prevent homogeneous nucleation in order for the
cement particles to be big enough to bridge the gaps between grains of
filler.  For of these most cements, if the temperature is kept high
enough, cement particles will only nucleate on the surfaces of grains
of filler; this may help to produce a solid mask.  (More
speculatively, pressure control is another possible lever to control
nucleation, but this would probably require a liquid-filled chamber.)
It may also be possible to solve this problem by making the
precipitation mass-transport-limited.

Filler particles with more extreme aspect ratios — clays such as
bentonite being the champion here, though a less expansive clay may be
more practical for this use — should lower the critical percolation
threshold needed to form a solid mass, thus placing less stringent
demands on the nucleation process.

Densification may be needed after the initial precipitation, since
when the cement precipitates from solution, the water and other solute
remain.  (For example, if reacting aqueous dipotassium phosphate
(which dissolves 150 g per 100 mℓ of water) with calcium chloride to
produce hydroxyapatite, you have potassium chloride and water taking
up space in the result.)  Densification can be carried out by passing
a supersaturated solution of the same cement, or a compatible cement,
over the printed object once it is removed from the powder bed; or it
can be carried out by infusing the pores with a different material,
perhaps a melt, again after powder removal.

Bicarbonate as a hydroxyl donor
-------------------------------

Cyanoacrylates polymerize in the presence of hydroxyl ions; dripping
cyanoacrylate onto NaHCO₃, stealing hydroxyl ions and converting it to
sodium carbonate, is a well-known manual additive manufacturing
technique which can probably be improved by adding filler to the
NaHCO₃.

Bicarbonate as a CO₂ donor
--------------------------

Waterglass (sodium or potassium silicate) forms a silica gel
rapidly upon exposure to CO₂; maybe you
can use NaHCO₃ as a CO₂ donor for this purpose.  Certainly you can
harden it with acids instead.

