It should be possible to make parsing nearly always as fast as KMP
string search, or even faster, without even resorting to SIMD.

parselov
--------

As mentioned in file `parallel-dfa`:

> Bjoern Hoehrmann has been working on an algorithm called “parselov”
> which compiles a context-free grammar to a finite-state automaton
> that approximates the CFG using a limited-depth parse stack (one
> stack item, I think).

The idea, as I understand it, is that you can parse a deterministic
CFG with a deterministic pushdown automaton (“DPDA”), which can be
analyzed as a finite state machine augmented with an unlimited-depth
stack.  It follows that you can parse a limited-stack-depth
approximation of a context-free grammar with a finite state machine,
since there are a finite number of stack states with N items or less.
(Evidence from human errors in speaking natural languages, and from
the verisimilitude of natural language generated by LSTMs and similar
neural networks, suggests that in fact this is what we do most of the
time.)

The potentially exponentially large number of stack states suggests
that enumerating them for any reasonable depth might be infeasible,
but typically the stack states are strongly dependent on one another;
in most languages, for example, you can’t be parsing a formal
parameter list unless you’re just inside a function declaration, and
you can’t be parsing a string unless you’re just inside an expression.
So the base of the exponential might be surprisingly low.

But what happens if your pushdown automaton wants to push an (N+1)th
item on the stack?  Of course, you could decide to abort, and if your
stack depth was deep enough, that might be fine.  But, as an
alternative, you could shift the N-1 items on the stack over by one
and enter an “overdepth” state.  Then, when popping, you can
deterministically reduce the number of stack items in your finite
state while keeping the overdepth flag, until you reach some low water
mark of such stack items; then you add nondeterministic transitions to
unshift each of the possible next stack items, and
nondeterministically clear the overdepth flag or not.

If the distance between the low water mark and N, the high water mark,
is large enough, then only a tiny fraction of the tokens or characters
input will result in a nondeterministic transition.

(The low-water mark could be as low as 0, but in that case, the state
you could have to shift back in could be any arbitrary state.  If it’s
at least 1, you have some context that reduces the number of possible
transitions.)

By itself, this gives you a nondeterministic finite state automaton
which functions as a sort of amnesiac pushdown automaton, accepting a
regular language that is a strict superset of your original
context-free language.  But, when implementing this, you can add an
extra “spill stack” in memory, which precisely tracks the items
shifted out of the finite stack window.  Then, when doing an
unshifting transition, you can pop the spill stack to see exactly
which state to transition to.

Thus you have transformed a DPDA into another equivalent DPDA with
many more states and much less frequent pushes and pops — most of the
time it is just a DFA which occasionally pushes things, but
occasionally it pops and consults the popped value, as well as the
input, to determine its next transition.  The transformation is
parameterized by two numbers, the low-water mark and N, the high-water
mark.  If they are both 0, it’s the identity transformation on DPDAs;
if they are both 1, as I understand it, it’s parselov.

(A precisely analogous transformation can transform a nondeterministic
PDA into another, similarly more efficient, nondeterministic PDA.)

But we have more degrees of freedom available for optimization than
that; we could vary those numbers depending on the stack situation.
In particular, we would like to avoid stack activity in situations
that occur frequently, but we don’t care about avoiding stack activity
in situations that occur rarely; instead we would like to avoid state
proliferation.

But grammars don’t carry any information about the relative frequency
of different situations.

Profile-guided optimization
---------------------------

PGO is a technique used to enable modern AOT compilers to compete with
JIT compilers.  You compile your program with profiling turned on, run
it for a while, and then compile it a second time using the profiling
information to guide the optimization, so that it optimizes things
that are important instead of things that aren’t.

In this particular case, the only thing you would need to produce from
“profiling” is the sequence of inputs and state and stack changes in
your DPDA as it parses some sentences.  Then, given a candidate set of
sets-of-top-few-stack-items to assign to finite states to avoid pushes
and pops, and some kind of description of the low-water-mark policy,
it is straightforward to compute the number of pushes and pops that
remain, and which states they are from; a greedy optimization process
should do a reasonable and perhaps optimal job of choosing where to
merge states and where to split them.

However, this PGO should enable us to not just equal lex’s
performance, but exceed it substantially, because, on modern
processors, the cost of indirecting through a jump table is greater
than the cost of a comparison tree in nearly all cases — but the
comparison tree’s performance can vary substantially depending on how
it’s laid out.  So, by taking advantage of statistics about which
characters are encountered in which states in practice, we should be
able to parse context-free grammars at gigabytes per second on modern
CPUs.

Eliminating caching of parse results
------------------------------------

If that works out, it should have substantial implications for the
architecture of software, because a substantial fraction of modern
software is dedicated to caching the results of parsing.  Python’s
.pyc bytecode files, the Emacs-Lisp .elc they aped, Java .class files,
minified JS, the browser DOM, and all kinds of CSV storage things
exist mostly to avoid slowly reparsing things that have already been
parsed.  I’m typing this in Emacs, which has all kinds of stupid hacks
to avoid reparsing the buffer for syntax highlighting until there’s
some idle time.

If you can parse at gigabytes per second, then in many cases it isn’t
useful to store those parse results.  If Emacs reparses the buffer
from the beginning after every keystroke for syntax-highlighting, that
will only begin to impede its responsiveness once the buffer is
several megabytes in size; if it checkpoints the parse state every
megabyte, there is no danger.  Similarly, you could run your database
queries directly on the CSV rather than importing it into the
database.  (None of these examples are pure, though: indexing a column
of ten million numbers so you can join it with another table would
still take an appreciable fraction of a second, even if your CSV
parsing were instant, and both Java and Elisp do substantial
optimization before writing their bytecode.  But maybe they
shouldn’t.)

And storing the parse results *is* potentially harmful, since in the
absence of a general computation-result-caching system like
`minimal-dependency-system`, `dependent-data`, or
`blob-computation-notes`, or at least the kind of reliable filesystem
change detection discussed in `immutable-filesystem`, there’s a
constant risk of that preparsed data being outdated with respect to
its original source.
