Jef Raskin invented the word “quasimode” to describe the user
interface technique of setting a mode only as long as a certain key is
held down, like Shift, Control, or ⌘.  Quasimodes can multiply the
expressivity of user interfaces without the usability problems created
by full-blown input modes like Caps Lock or Vim’s command mode.

I’m going to focus here on text editors, which (for better or worse)
are the predominant medium for human expression through computers in
2018, whether you’re typing a WhatsApp message, a Tweet, a Facebook
status, a spreadsheet formula, or a YouTube comment.  And I’m largely
focusing on environments for computer programming, because those are
the most expressive text editing environments.

Modes
-----

Modes are a usability problem for a couple of reasons.  First, because
of “mode errors”: if the consequences of an action such as pressing
the “B” key depends on what mode you’re in, and you don’t know what
mode you’re in, you don’t know what will happen when you take the
action.  (The classic example is when you can’t figure out how to log
in because your Caps Lock key is on when you’re typing your password).
Second, because of the “gulf of execution” — even if you know that the
“B” key can cause the consequences you want in some mode, it can be
hard to figure out how to get into that mode.

Emacs is mostly modeless in the sense that the same keys usually do
the same thing; its “editing modes” usually have more effect on things
like syntax highlighting and where the tab stops are than on what will
happen if you press the “b” key, although there are exceptions.  Vim,
on the other hand, has a “normal mode” for most editing commands and
“insert mode” and “replace mode” for actually writing stuff.

Quasimodes in common practice
-----------------------------

Emacs uses quasimodes in its user interface to the extent that was
possible with the “space cadet” keyboards that were common at MIT when
it was designed in the 1970s and 1980s, which is to say that it uses
“key chords”.  The “B” key, for example, inserts “b”, except that if
Shift is held, it inserts “B”; if Control is held, it moves to the
left by one character; if Alt (“Meta”) is held, it moves left by one
word; if both Control and Alt are held, it moves left by one
parenthesized expression; and if Shift is also held while using
control-B (“C-b”), alt-B (“M-b”), or control-alt-B (“C-M-b”), the
cursor movement creates or extends a text selection (“region”).  So
the “B” key can invoke eight different functions modelessly — or,
let’s say, quasimodally.  But some of those functions require holding
down as many as four keys at a time.  This is commonly held to make
Emacs a risk factor for repetitive stress injuries, although I don’t
know of any rigorous studies demonstrating this.

Space-cadet keyboards did not send any data when these quasimode or
“modifier” keys (Control, Meta, Shift, and also Hyper and Super) were
pressed and released by themselves, nor when a modifier was released
after pressing some modified keys.  Neither did ASCII terminals of the
1970s and 1980s, and neither do ASCII terminal emulators today in
2018, 45 years later.  Consequently, any editors that aspire to being
used through such things are unable to take actions when a modifier
key is initially pressed or when it is released, nor can they
distinguish between, for example, holding Control and typing “XB” and
separately typing control-X and then control-S, releasing Control in
between.  (Also, in ASCII terminals, the Control key collapses many
characters together, typically three, so control-shift-b will do the
same thing as control-b, and control-@ does the same thing as
control-space, so keys distinguished only by such distinctions are
typically assigned to less important commands.)

This means that some of the user-interface conveniences
personal-computer users got used to during the 1980s are impossible to
implement in this environment.  For example, some MS-DOS programs
display an on-screen menu listing the functions available on the
various function keys, and the menu changes when Control, Alt, or both
Control and Alt are pressed, displaying the function that will
actually be invoked if you press, say, F8.  Likewise, the Macintosh
Key Caps applet displays a picture of the keyboard labeled with the
characters that will be produced if you press a given key; the labels
change if you press Shift or Option.  And the task-switching key
sequence in Microsoft Windows, introduced I think in Windows 95,
cycles through the most-recently-used windows as long as you hold Alt
and press Tab repeatedly; no window is activated until you release the
Alt key.

The limits of key chording
--------------------------

Emacs and Vim both have a large number of commands.  The Emacs I’m
typing this in is currently configured with 14165 different commands,
which is too many to assign to key chords on the keyboard — even if
you have four modifier keys, so that each non-modifier key had 16
different chords, a 105-key keyboard would only have 1616 distinct
chords in this way.  Also, since the editor can’t provide any visual
feedback related to modifier keys that are currently held down, the
memory load would be quite heavy.  So, instead, they use three
alternative approaches: prefix keys, a command line, and command mode.

Prefix keys
-----------

Prefix keys are sort of like modes that only last for a single
keystroke.  For example, in Emacs, as I said, control-B moves left by
one character, and B by itself inserts “b”.  But control-X control-B
opens up a window listing all the things that are open in Emacs, and
control-X B prompts you for the name of the thing you would like to
switch to.  In effect, control-X puts Emacs into a mode which changes
the effect of the next keystroke.  Analogously, in Vim, typing “?” (as
shift-/ on Qwerty keyboards) does a search backwards, but “g?”
decrypts the current selection with the rot13 cipher.  The “g” key
puts Vim into a mode which changes the meaning of the next keystroke.

GNOME and Microsoft Windows applications can typically be
keyboard-operated by using the Alt key and a letter to select a
pull-down menu, then further letters or arrow keys to select submenus
or menu commands.  This is also an implementation of prefix keys.  It
shows how modes can actually be more usable than having hundreds of
commands on modified keys: it’s feasible to display breadcrumbs and
guidance.

However, prefix keys still cause mode errors, which are still
frustrating, and even in the best cases, they don’t help to reduce the
gulf of execution much.  Among the key sequences currently defined in
my Emacs are things like control-X 8 / A (which inserts the letter
“Å”), control-X control-K B (which binds the last-defined keyboard
macro to a key or key sequence), control-X Enter shift-F (which
changes the character encoding used for the filename of the currently
open file), and over a thousand others, most of which I’ve never heard
of even though I’ve been using Emacs almost daily for a quarter
century.  It can be hard to find out that these even exist, even
though Emacs has an active community, comprehensive documentation, and
many ways to explore and query.

Command lines
-------------

In Vim, you invoke the command line by typing “:”; Emacs has several
command lines, including the Lisp command line invoked by alt-:, the
editor-command selector invoked by alt-X, and the shell command line
invoked by the command “shell”.  In Firefox and other web browsers,
you type control-L or ⌘L to edit the URL, and in Gnumeric or Excel,
you can invoke the command line with the F2 key or “=”.

The command line is sort of a mode, but the B key generally causes a
“b” to appear on the screen, just like in normal life, and the normal
editing commands do normal editing things; the difference is that what
you’re editing is a command which will eventually be executed, usually
when you hit Enter.  Command lines can still cause mode errors where
you want to be typing stuff into a document and you end up typing
commands instead, but generally they support more usability features
than prefix keys.

The “alt-:” command line in Emacs is for evaluating Lisp expressions,
which can invoke editor commands, define new functions, or do useful
computations.  For example, I recently evaluated “(* 16 101)”, the
product of 16 and 101, to see how many commands a 105-key keyboard
with four modifier keys could invoke.  Earlier I evaluated “(+ (* 9
.40) (* 4 .59))”, which calculated the BOM cost of a possible circuit
design that used 9 chips that cost 40¢ and 4 chips that cost 59¢.

Emacs also supports a different way of evaluating Lisp expressions.
Its `*scratch*` buffer is by default in an editing mode called
“lisp-interaction-mode” in which the key chord control-J scans
backwards from the cursor for a complete Lisp expression, evaluates
it, and inserts the results into the buffer on a new line.  So,
instead of typing `alt-: (* 16 101) Enter`, you can switch to
`*scratch*` and type `(* 16 101) control-J`, with the following
result:

    (* 16 101)
    1616

In “lisp-interaction-mode”, control-J is bound to the command
“eval-print-last-sexp”, which does what I explained above.  Also, by
default, throughout Emacs, control-X control-E is bound to
“eval-last-sexp”, which does the same thing except that it doesn’t
insert the result into the buffer.  This is especially useful when you
are programming in Emacs Lisp, because it allows you to point at
pieces of your code and instantly run them to see if they do what you
think they should.

This is a more modeless way of providing a command line; it was
pioneered in Smalltalk, where “Do it!” and “Print it!” are commands
available on key chords and on menus in every text editing window, and
have been since the 1970s.  These work on either the current selection
or, if none, the current line, treating it as a Smalltalk sentence and
inserting the result as a new selection.  This is a little bit
clumsier than the Lisp approach because Smalltalk sentences are not
self-delimiting, but you also don’t need it as often — my most common
use of this facility in Emacs is to recompile a function I just edited
so I can try it out, and Smalltalk has an even smoother way to do
that.

However, in a sense precisely because it is more modeless, this
approach to providing a command line has suboptimal usability.  If I
type `(* 16 101) control-X control-E` in this document, it isn’t until
the last chord that Emacs knows that `(* 16 101)` is intended as Lisp
code.  If I accidentally type `(*16 101)`, Emacs doesn’t know to
highlight `*16` as an undefined function until then.  If I start
typing `(backw` in this buffer and ask for completions of the
partially-typed function name, Emacs doesn’t know I’m intending to
type Emacs Lisp and so can’t complete that to `backward-` and list the
18 functions whose name starts with that.  By contrast, in the alt-:
command line, it can and does.

The alt-X command line in Emacs just allows you to select among the
14165 already-defined commands I mentioned earlier; if you select a
command that needs arguments, it either obtains them from context
(such as from the current selection) or prompts you for them
afterwards (yet another mode).

The alt-X equivalent in Oberon is modeless; it works like the
Smalltalk “Do it!” or Emacs `lisp-interaction-mode` — if you click a
certain mouse button, it looks for a command name in the text around
the point where you clicked, and if it names a procedure, it calls
that procedure with no arguments.  I think `File.save` is one example,
although I don’t have my Oberon book here.  The command is not
permitted to prompt the user and await input, because Oberon is a
single-threaded event-driven system, but it can do things like open a
new window for further interaction and put more command texts into
that window, or some other window.

Repetition and adjustment
-------------------------

If I want to type a line of asterisks on this Qwerty keyboard, it’s
pretty easy; I put my left pinky on a Shift key and bang on the 8 key
with my right middle finger until I have the right number of
asterisks, possibly adjusting at the end with a few backspaces if I
overshot.  By contrast, if I want a line of alternating periods and
colons, it’s a real pain to type by hand; I need to use my right ring
finger on the period key and coordinate my two pinkies on the
semicolon and Shift keys to get the colon.  Repeating a single key is
much, much easier than repeating a two-key sequence, and repeating a
sequence of a chord and a key is even harder.

Now, Emacs has a keyboard macro facility.  Keyboard macros are good
for repeating something a number of times.  I can type “F3 .: F4”,
with the F3 and F4 keys, to define a keyboard macro that inserts “.:”.
The traditional key sequence to run the macro is control-X E, and it
takes a count, so if I want a line of 20 of them, I can type
“control-U 20 control-X E” and then add a trailing period:

    .:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.

The trouble is that it’s usually a real pain to figure out what 20
should be until you see it.  (Why am I counting things when I have a
computer to count things for me?)

Vim, and vi, were better at this; you could type “a.: Esc .....”, and
each “.” you typed would append another “.:”.  You could also type
“a.: Esc 20.” or even “20a.: Esc” if you knew the count.

Emacs’s “indent-rigidly” command had the same problem; you had to
figure out how many spaces you wanted to indent by ahead of time, say
by multiplying 3 by 4 in your head, and type “control-U 12 control-X
Tab”.  Worse still was “undo”, which used to be just “control-X U”,
and which you almost always want to repeat a difficult-to-calculate
number of times.

Modern Emacs has a feature called “transient modes” or “transient
maps” which temporarily change the meanings of only a few keys — like
prefix keys, but leaving most of the key functions undisturbed.  In
particular, now you can type “control-X E E E” to repeat the macro
three times: “.:.:.:”.  (Also, you can type F4 to repeat a macro, and
control-/ or control-_ to undo.)  What they did with indent-rigidly is
more interesting: now, if you just type control-X Tab without giving a
count first, the right and left arrows indent and outdent the selected
region by one space, or by a whole tab stop if you use shift.  Because
this mode only alters the meanings of a few keys, it rarely causes
mode errors, but they do happen occasionally.

The interesting thing here is that these are ways of interactively and
almost continuously varying a parameter in either direction while
observing the results, much like Bret Victor’s “Kill Math” proposal
(and some of his other ideas).

WordStar’s late-1970s approach to this problem, by the way, was
interestingly different: you would ask it to start repeating a
command, which it would do at a rate you could vary interactively with
the keys 0 to 9, with a key to stop it — much like the autoscroll
feature on some web sites.  I suspect that this was not a viable
approach on the timesharing machines where Emacs and vi were born
because of the unpredictability of their response times and the high
costs of context switches and terminal-screen repaints.

The Cat, LEAP and THE
---------------------

The Canon Cat was a text-based personal computer whose user interface
Jef Raskin designed after being pushed out of the Macintosh project at
Apple.  Among its daring user-interface innovations was that, not only
did it have no mouse, it also had no vertical arrow keys.  Instead, it
had two “LEAP” keys, one for moving forward and one for moving
backward, which were quasimodal, like modifier keys, but for
incremental text search, like Emacs’s control-S and control-R
commands.  Like Emacs’s control-R, when the search terminated, you
would be left at the beginning of the search hit, but unlike Emacs,
the search terminated when you released the LEAP key, making LEAP both
faster to invoke and less error-prone — because it wasn’t a mode.

Raskin claimed that experiments showed that it was substantially
faster for navigating text than a mouse.

Canon mass-produced the Cat and sold a number of them, but it was
pretty much a failure in the market.  In later years, Raskin was
working on an extended reimplementation of the concept as free
software, called “The Humane Environment” or “THE”, before being
struck down with a few weeks’ worth of warning by pancreatic cancer.
THE never gained significant adoption and has largely been forgotten.

Thoughts about modifier keys for quasimodes
-------------------------------------------

So, that’s the historical background.  Here’s some wild speculation
about how to apply it.

You can quite reasonably substitute quasimodes for the search modes
used by Emacs and Vim; you could maybe control-F (for PARC bindings;
control-S for Emacs bindings) to start a search, which would continue
only as long as you held the control key.  You wouldn’t be able to
disambiguate searching for control characters without some kind of
additional escaping, but for the common cases of searching for Enter
and Esc, both Vim and Emacs already need the additional escape
sequence (control-V and control-Q respectively, or control-J to search
for Enter in Emacs), so this would actually be an improvement.  I’m
not sure what to do for next and previous match other than arrow keys;
maybe alt-K and alt-J.

For calculations — the thing I most use Emacs M-: for — an RPN
calculator quasimode would be quite handy.  You could type control-=
to launch it, and it would persist as long as you held the Control
key, fading away when released.  Numbers would be pushed on the stack,
separated by spaces; `*+-/^` would do their usual things, but `%`
would do divmod; `,` could perform vector concatenation; `dxr` would
dup, swap, and rotate; backspace would delete; `pqtscale` would
compute π, square roots, tangents, sines, cosines, arctangents,
logarithms, and exponentials; `i` would generate sequences; and `(`
and `)` would respectively take numbers from the document you were
editing and put numbers into it.  So to double a number you would type
`control-= (2*)`, although it might be snatched from somewhere other
than where you were.  The stack would remain persistent between
invocations, and values on the stack would retain their provenance,
operations being reversible with `z`.  Vectors would be graphed by
default, toggled with `g`.  This would be substantially more
convenient than the nonsense I’m using now with alt-: and running
`units` in a shell.

More ideal still would be the ability to edit input values after the
fact and watch the changes propagate, like in a spreadsheet.  And it
would be nice to have access to more mathematical functions than there
are letters, and to be able to search for them.

Of course, substituting a quasimode for the Emacs alt-X named-command
invocation is straightforward; control-X would show you the available
commands matching your search (and some kind of visualization of their
results) and you could invoke one with Enter.

The Tab key is pretty much off limits for these things because both of
my Control keys are on my left pinky.

Substituting a quasimode for the indentation stuff is also super easy;
I’m currently using control-< and control-> for this, though control-H
and control-L would work if I weren’t using Emacs standard
keybindings.  Mouse movement might be best for providing the input for
things like this, and also maybe navigating through undo history.

Some kind of thing that would insert a “form” into your current
document, with like fields and stuff, would be super handy.
Especially if you could like search through a list of currently
defined forms and maybe fill in some fields with default values and
already existing context data, and maybe have a command button or two
to take actions that had side effects, and if the fields could
recompute automatically and maybe satisfy constraints.  And also if
this was a generalization that included mathematical relationships
(cylinder volume is 2πrl, surface is 4πr + 2πrl, from which you can
deduce any two of those variables from the other two) and values in
mutable tables that you could assert and retract from.  Maybe this is
a different idea that doesn’t really have to do with quasimodes at
all.

Window switching, task switching, and so on is probably the most
common fully-quasimodal keyboard interaction technique in use today,
via the Microsoft Windows alt-Tab keybinding that has been widely
adopted since then.  The standard approach is to cycle through a
least-recently-used list of windows, displaying thumbnails; the
iswitchb-mode and ido-mode alternatives to this in Emacs are modal
rather than quasimodal, but also winnow the list according to a search
string as you type it.  Now that I've been using iswitchb-mode for ten
years (I’m trying ido-mode) this winnowing seems like the obviously
right thing.  But it would be better if it were quasimodal.

Similarly, term lookup (whether library functions, dictionary words,
or Wikipedia articles) is a possible useful quasimode.

Multiple-cursor editing, as implemented in Sublime and IDEA, is
arguably a “mode,” but it may be difficult to make it a quasimode;
it’s sort of an alternative to keyboard macros, which means that you
need to be able to use all the usual editing commands.

Mice, multitouch and quasimodes
-------------------------------

I've focused on keyboard interfaces, but of course mouse drags and
touchmoves are even more common interactions than switching windows
with the mouse, and they’re quasimodal.  But I think quasimodes are
even more promising for multitouch interaction than for keyboard
interaction.