I was thinking about the problem of rasterizing a set of polylines
filled with colors; for example, for rendering text from an outline
font after some arbitrary geometric transformation.  It occurred to me
that it’s probably reasonable to approximate each smooth segment of
the polyline with a quadratic or cubic spline providing a fractional
X-coordinate given the Y-coordinate; this explicit spline may need to
have more knots than the parametric spline defining the original
polyline in order to achieve adequate precision.

Note that computing the X-coordinate as a function of the Y-coordinate
is transposed from the usual convention for graphing functions,
established I suppose by Descartes from, probably, the Greeks’
convention of writing their letters from left to right.

It should be possible to use interval arithmetic to conservatively
approximate how precisely you need to approximate the parametric
spline with the explicit spline.

Anyway, once you have a bunch of explicit splines, the inner loop of
updating all of the X-coordinates for a new raster is just this:

    x += Δx;
    Δx += ΔΔx;
    // and if they’re cubic splines:
    ΔΔx += ΔΔΔx;

These vector-addition operations can be carried out in SIMD or SPMD
fashion, which can be up to 512 bits per instruction on modern
computing hardware.

When we encounter a knot in the spline, we just need to update an
element of the ΔΔx or ΔΔΔx vector with the new value.  If we instead
encounter a corner in the polyline, we also update Δx.  A top edge,
corner, or curve involves adding two new items; a bottom one involves
removing them.

This gives us a vector of x-coordinates; if we sort that vector, we
get partitions dividing the scan line into regions alternating inside
and outside.  (It may be worthwhile to keep all of the vectors sorted,
since most of the time the order won’t change from one scan line to
the next.)

To keep the knots at least 16 scanlines apart without the errors
getting over some size, I think we need an extra 4 fraction bits per
order of polynomial; that is, for quadratic splines, we need 8 more
fraction bits for ΔΔx than we would need for our desired precision of
x, and for cubic splines, we need 12 more fraction bits for ΔΔΔx.
This probably means that 32-bit fixed point with 16 fraction bits is
adequate for most purposes, providing 16 levels of antialiasing with
cubic splines, while 16-bit fixed or floating point is not, which
means that a 512-bit vector is only 16 elements.  But that’s still
enough to give a dramatic speedup.
