Stirling engines and adiabatic compressed-air energy storage both
depend for their efficiency on a regenerator, which can be something
as simple as a pebble bed or packed column, or as elaborate as a
ceramic honeycomb.

I think regenerators have some significant tradeoffs, though.  In
particular they tend to impose a fairly large pressure loss on the air
(or other fluid) passing through them, and they cool off significantly
if left to sit, just through the diffusion of heat through the
regenerator itself.  And I think — though I’m not sure — that the
thermal mass of the regenerator itself slows down the ramp time of
Stirling engines.

You can cut a regenerator’s head loss by making it shorter, so the air
travels less distance while constricted by it, but this puts a low
ceiling on the total amount of thermal energy that can be stored, and
also worsens the diffusion problem.

A countercurrent heat exchanger with a different, probably liquid,
coolant — a recuperator — could solve these problems.  This allows you
to keep separate superinsulated hot and cold reservoirs, connected to
the heat exchanger with long, thin pipes, and pump the coolant either
direction through the pipes to keep the heat exchanger at a constant
temperature.

Countercurrent heat exchangers with very low pressure drops and very
high heat fluxes are feasible — in biology they are called “retia
mirabilia” and were discovered 1800 years ago.  They intertwine two
fractal branching structures in such a way that they come in contact
throughout a surface with a large fractal dimension vaguely resembling
the surface of a piece of broccoli.  As far as I know, nobody has ever
built an artificial rete mirabile, although there have been a number
of papers and books on process intensification that come close.  It
will be best to build them from a solid material with low thermal
conductivity such as a glass or ceramic, since if you can get the
fluid passages below 100μm in diameter, the distance between them is
very small and the surface area between them is very large, so it’s
probably more important to slow lengthwise heat diffusion than to
promote transverse heat diffusion.

(See file `capillary-heat-exchanger` for more about such heat
exchangers.)

If the secondary coolant is a liquid, it may be necessary to use more
than one liquid, because most liquids have a narrow usable temperature
range.  For example, ethanol spans -120° to about +100°, propylene
glycol spans -59° to +188°, and glycerol spans about 0° to +290°, but
organic liquids in general start not merely to boil but to break down
chemically somewhere between 200° and 300°.  Molten nitrate salts span
a somewhat larger temperature range but are solid anywhere near room
temperature.  Liquid metals cover the 200° to 1000° range reasonably
well, but most of them are also solid at room temperature, potentially
posing difficulties for a cold start.

I think this is important because Carnot efficiency is 1 - Tₖ/Tₕ,
where Tₖ is the temperature of the kold reservoir and Tₕ the
temperature of the hot one, so a wide temperature swing is crucial for
heat engine efficiency; this clearly applies to Stirling engines, but
I’m not yet clear on whether it’s necessary for adiabatic compressed
air energy storage.