Thinking about the issues in file `dercuano-drawings`, I came up with
some ideas that I think will be pretty interesting for interactive
drawing.  As usual, they are (sort of) algebraic and recursive.

The fundamental *spatial* element of the system is a curve, what you
might call a path or a polyline.  A curve is a continuous function
from some interval of *t* points in time to (*x*, *y*) points in
space, so it has direction and potentially variable velocity and
duration as well as positions.  (Maybe it also has a continuously
varying pressure.)  All curves start at time *t*=0, but they may have
different end points.

The easiest way to create a new curve is to draw one with the mouse
(which, in file `fitts-law-musings`, I found had a bandwidth of about
6 bits per second) or a multitouch touchscreen (which I haven’t really
tested yet but am hoping to find will have better bandwidth; it does
have pressure).  But you can also create curves that are straight
lines or circles.

Each curve also has some kind of visual attributes, like width, color,
transparency, blurriness, and some kind of noise texture, for each of
stroke and fill.  For right now, though, I’m less interested in those
than about the purely positional ones.

Given a curve C, there are several unary operations that give new
curves: C.reversed, which is the same positions in reverse order;
C.normalized, which is the same positions with their time interval
compressed or stretched to *t* ∈ [0, 1]; C.closed, which adds an
instant straight-line jump back to the start; and C.constant, which
makes the velocity along the curve constant, but doesn’t change its
duration.  If curves also carry pressure information, there’s also
C.monoline, which sets the pressure to unity; C.brush, which sets the
pressure to the reciprocal of the velocity; and C.invbrush, which sets
the velocity to the reciprocal of the pressure.  I want on-screen
buttons of some kind to select these operations.

There are also operations to combine a curve, or set of curves, with a
point: C + P translates the curve by the (x, y) coordinates in P,
while P·C rotates and scales the curve (around its start point?) by
the parameters in the point.  I want interactive operations for
invoking these with a point I specify interactively using the mouse or
using pinch-zoom with two fingers.  These two operations P₀·C + P₁
form a “frame of reference”.

Each point along a curve can be associated with a frame of reference
in different ways, and another curve can be transformed by that frame
of reference.  First, there’s a translated frame of reference, where
the rotate-and-scale part of the transformation is the identity.
Second, there’s a translated-and-rotated frame of reference, where the
rotate-and-scale part of the transformation scales by unity but
rotates so that the tangent forward along the curve is always in the
same direction, or in some arbitrary direction when the tangent
doesn’t exist.  Third, there are translated-and-rotated frames of
reference where the scale is taken from the velocity or pressure of
the curve.

The operation C₀.interpolate(C₁, C₂, N) produces a set of N curves.
The first curve is C₁ translated and rotated to the beginning of C₀,
and the last curve is C₂ translated and rotated to the end of C₀.  The
curves in between interpolate smoothly between them.  Another similar
operation does the same thing without the rotation.  These operations
are invocable in a direct-manipulation kind of way; initially C₁ and
C₂ are the same, and N can be interactively adjusted up and down.

(Hmm, maybe this is the wrong formulation?  Maybe I actually want to
add C₁ and C₂ to the definition of C₀?  In that case the objects
become drawings rather than curves?  Maybe I want to be able to
interactively see the interpolated curves as I’m drawing C₀?  Maybe
drawing C₀ is, at least normally, a context-menu operation on C₁?
What about adding noise to the interpolated curves?)

The idea is that a variety of visual repetition with variability,
including things like grids, hatching on one side of a line, wood
textures, starbursts, and tree branches, becomes straightforward and
easy to express and to adapt, while capturing the real Kolmogorov
complexity of the drawing in the data structure that is built up.
