We were talking today at a "natural construction techniques" workshop
about how to build a ceramics-firing kiln.  We'd spent the weekend
making adobe from materials found onsite and making buildings out of
it.

A pottery kiln needs to withstand heating to at least 1050° for
earthenware and bricks, and at least 1200° for stoneware or porcelain.

The most common way to build a kiln is apparently by lining it with
kaolin-derived refractory brick.  But there's no kaolin in the native
dirt on site.  What could be done about that, aside from going to the
ceramics supply store to buy some kaolin?

Well, it might be possible to extract kaolin from glossy paper; it's
one of the two minerals used to give common magazine paper its gloss,
the other being calcite.  Or it might be possible to mill porcelain to
powder (known as "grog" when it's sand-sized, or "pitchers" when
coarser) and then sinter the powder.  But I think wet milled porcelain
powder isn't going to have the plasticity of kaolin.  You'd have to
stick it together with something that will hold it in place until it
fires.

My first idea for such a binder was salt, because I had the mistaken
idea that sodium chloride didn't melt until 1500° or so.  But in fact
its melting point is only 801°.  But kaolin won't sinter until 1200°
or more.  It's possible that the salt-binder idea might happen to work
--- if the salt lets the porcelain chunks sinter at a lower
temperature, but doesn't flux them enough for them to melt entirely at
the temperatures the refractory must withstand --- but it's likely to
fail one way or the other.

A somewhat more likely binder candidate is simply the other clays
available.  You'd mix a small amount of clay into a large amount of
milled porcelain.

You might be able to press the milled porcelain into bricks using
something like a compressed-earth brick press, then firing the bricks.
This way, the porcelain particles are in direct contact with each
other, and there's no possible flux in the way.  Achieving porosity
might be difficult, because I think you couldn't simply mix in
sawdust, the normal way; its elasticity would force the porcelain
particles apart when you took the brick press.  Charcoal or carbon
black might work.

Another possible alternative would be to make the refractory bricks
from some other mineral found onsite.  Quartz, for example, is
abundant almost anywhere, and if you can purify it and get it to
sinter, its melting point is 1670°; in theory, you could also turn
quartz and alumina into kaolin, but I have no idea how.  ("Chemical
weathering of rock", says Wikipedia.  But what reactions chemically
weather quartz and corundum into dust?)  Magnesium oxide (periclase)
might work?  It doesn't melt until 2852°, and you can presumably make
it from electrolyzed seawater, but I don't know how to separate it out
from dirt, or if it's common.

The traditional refractory used for gas lantern mantles is a mixture
of uranium and thorium oxides, made from monazite, a common ingredient
of sand.  However, even if we could practically separate those out
(separating the monazite should be easy because of its high density,
but separating the rare earths involves lye and hydrochloric acid at
above-boiling temperatures), people might complain that the furnace
was too radioactive.

Calcium oxide (quicklime) doesn't melt until 2572° and would therefore
work, and it's easily made by heating limestone to 825°, if there's
limestone onsite, which there probably is.  However, it's dangerously
reactive with human bodies and other sources of water.

Magnetite is maybe the easiest mineral to separate out of sand.  It
oxidizes to hematite, ferric oxide, if heated with oxygen, and that
doesn't melt until 1566°.  I haven't heard of it being used for
refractories, but it seems like it would work.