Education is broken; people don’t learn much, it takes them a very
long time to learn it, they forget most of it, and then they don’t
generalize.  It’s tempting to attribute this to people being stupid,
and clearly that’s a condition of the problem space, but it’s no
excuse for not solving the problem.

Lectures are terrible
---------------------

The medieval lecture model we use is partly to blame.  It originated
as a kind of mass production for books: the reader reads from one copy
of the book while the audience notes down verbatim everything they
say.  As manual methods of making many copies of a text go, this is
quite efficient, but once the number of copies goes past 500 or so,
the printing press is far more efficient.

Sadly, this model survived the introduction of the printing press and
even the xerox, continuing to this day in many classes, in which the
pupils waste precious attention they could spend assimilating the
material on copying it instead, as if they didn’t have smartphones in
their pockets capable of copying documents over Bluetooth at hundreds
of pages per second.

Nowadays the goal of lectures is not really making copies of written
material, but transferring knowledge from the mind of the lecturer
into the minds of the students, at its best leavened with some
entertainment or practical demonstrations to clarify the abstract
concepts.  But it is a terribly inefficient way of achieving this kind
of knowledge transfer; it’s roughly as effective as reading a textbook
[citation needed] but consumes the time of the lecturer as well as
imposing expensive coordination costs on the lecturer and students,
who must not only arrive at the lecture hall together but also pause
to think together if they are to have a chance of understanding the
material.

(In British universities, the rank below Professor, equivalent to US
“professor”, is in fact “Reader”, followed by “Lecturer”, which is a
mangled French word that also means “reader”.)

As a means of inspiring enthusiasm, however, lectures are almost
unmatched; only music, movies, sports, and blood rituals seem to be
able to compete, and of these all except music are much more costly.
So lecturers often opt for lectures in order to manipulate their
audiences emotionally, usually to further the interests of the
lecturer (for example, persuade colleagues that their research
interests are worthwhile, or to whip up political sentiment) but
occasionally in the interests of the audience.

Sadly, nowadays our lectures are quite often afflicted with slide
decks full of text.  While these are of some communicational benefit
when a language barrier separates the lecturer from their audience,
far more often, they further reduce the bandwidth of information
transfer while vitiating the lecture’s most signal virtue, that of
inflaming the passions.

Knowledge transfer
------------------

Learning depends, of course, on many other factors beyond knowledge
transfer.  For example, you need problem sets to guide students to
construct their knowledge, you need some kind of feedback loop to make
sure that the students aren’t learning errors as fact, you need spaced
practice to prevent the loss of knowledge to disuse, and you need
motivation to interest the students in the knowledge.  But in what
follows I’m focusing on purely the knowledge-transfer component of the
education process.

Bligh's book _What’s the Use of Lectures?_ and Armstrong’s [Natural
Learning in Higher Education][0] go into more detail on what lectures
are good for and how to promote better lectures.  But I come not to
praise lectures but to damn them, to damn them to Hell forever.

[0]: https://marketing.wharton.upenn.edu/files/?whdmsaction=public:main.file&fileID=8113

This is because reading a textbook and attending a lecture are far
from the fastest or most thorough means of learning.  In [numerous
controlled studies][1] students progress about two standard deviations
faster with a dedicated one-on-one tutor than with traditional
classes.  (I think this means about 30% faster.)

[1]: http://web.mit.edu/bosworth/MacData/afs.course/5/5.95/readings/bloom-two-sigma.pdf

You could argue, though, that one-on-one tutoring is too expensive,
and can only be justified when the goal of knowledge distribution is
light (i.e. it is desired for a small number of students to learn the
material) or the benefits of transferring the knowledge are so great
that it justifies occupying the time of a large number of skilled
tutors who could be practicing the knowledge rather than transferring
it.  Bloom does in fact argue this: “...more practical and realistic
conditions than the one-to-one tutoring, which is too costly for most
societies to bear on a large scale.”

However, this is not in fact the case.  Most lecture classes only
lecture to about 24 listeners, the majority of whom (let’s say ⅔) do
not learn the material well enough to teach it.  Of those who do,
almost none are allowed to teach the material for some three or four
years.

If we track the number of people to whom the knowledge has been
transferred over time, it can grow exponentially in this model, but it
works out to a doubling time of a year or a bit more.

By contrast, in the “one-room schoolhouse” model, the teacher mostly
teaches the most advanced students, who teach the less advanced
students, who teach those who are less advanced still.  The process of
teaching what you have recently learned serves both as a check to
unmask the pernicious fluency illusion and as additional practice
time.  Typically in the schoolhouse, according to rumor, this also
achieved a doubling time of around a year.

But we could do much better; the crucial question is how short a time
you have between mastering a lesson and having to teach it to someone
else.  If, for example, you study a lesson one week, balanced
half-and-half between working with a tutor and doing exercises on your
own, and act as a tutor in that lesson to two other people in the next
week, then the doubling time could be under a week.  (During the first
week you were presumably teaching the previous lesson to two other
people during the hours that you weren’t studying the new lesson.)

Even if one-on-one tutoring were only as effective as attending
lectures, this model would still defeat it; only four weeks after
tutoring the two initial students, you’d have 2+4+8+16 = 30 students
already up to speed on it.

Other Benefits of Tutoring
--------------------------

Bloom points out (in his paper on the “[2 Sigma Problem][2]” I
mentioned above) that tutoring also helps with focus (students spent
90% of time on task instead of 65%) and with positive attitude.

[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom%27s_2_Sigma_Problem
