Methods of pumping ice-vest coolant silently
============================================

I was thinking about file `ice-pants` and related ice vest stuff on
the bus the other day.  One of the potential problems with the design
is that it needs a pump; pumps are usually noisy and unreliable, in
part because they contain a lot of moving parts.  A pump that avoided
these problems would be desirable for an everyday-wear ice vest, which
after all only needs a small total flow rate.  (To remove 200 watts of
heat by warming water from 0° to 20°, you need about 2.4 milliliters
per second: 200 W / (20 kcal/ℓ).)

Magnetohydrodynamic motors
--------------------------

Magnetohydrodynamic motors are pumps that solve these problems by
passing a current through the liquid to be pumped at right angles to
an applied magnetic field.  The magnetic field produced by the current
creates a pressure gradient in the fluid, which propels it silently
through the passage.  Jacque Fresco famously envisioned silent ships
propelled by this means, although this might require unreasonably
large fuel cells if you aren’t going to generate the electricity with
a noisy heat engine; perhaps some navy has tried this approach for
silent nuclear submarine propulsion.  In, I think, 2018, the YouTube
channel Cody’sLab demonstrated the use of such a pump for pumping
mercury between reaction vessels for the chloralkali process.

The electrolysis problem
------------------------

However, electrolysis poses a potential difficulty for
magnetohydrodynamic motors in water and other ionic conductors: the
electrodes immersed in the liquid will tend to produce bubbles of
oxygen and hydrogen.  This problem can be reduced to some extent by
periodically reversing the direction of the current (and of the
applied magnetic field, so as to not reverse the flow direction) but
not, I think, eliminated, in a classical MHD motor.  In most
circumstances, this is not a problem for MHD motors, though measures
must be taken to prevent anodic dissolution, such as using carbon
electrodes.

Perhaps the lore of electroplating has useful information here,
because bubble buildup is a problem for electroplating — plating
doesn’t happen in regions of the cathode covered by bubbles.  But
anode bubbles are no problem for electroplating.

The buildup of explosive gases in the tubing of an ice vest could not
only impede liquid flow but potentially even pose a hazard of rupture
and fire.

Brine coolant
-------------

The coolant in the ice vest needs to have a melting point below that
of pure water so that it can pass unimpeded through the ice pack
without risk of freezing, and it needs to prevent bacterial and fungal
growth inside the tubing, since those can also produce gases and
potentially corrode the tubing.  One possible solution to this problem
is to use water sufficiently salty that almost no life forms can
survive in it, and this has the advantage of greatly increasing the
water’s conductivity.  This probably requires keeping the water from
contact with glass or metal to prevent heavy corrosion, though most
common plastics would be fine.

Eddy-current-driven pumping
---------------------------

A possible electrolysis-free way to do a magnetohydrodynamic motor to
pump an electrolyte is to use eddy (electrical) currents rather than
linear (electrical) currents through the electrolyte, thus eliminating
the need for electrode contact — in essence, a squirt coilgun rather
than a squirt railgun.  This is the same approach used in
squirrel-cage AC motors, coilguns, and some magnetic-levitation
systems.  I think eddy currents should provoke no ionic concentration
gradients at all.

One way to do this would be to wrap many coils around an
electrolyte-filled tube and energize the coils in the same current
direction in sequence, moving the magnetic field along the length of
the tube.  This will induce eddy currents inside the electrolyte
around the axis of the tube opposing the direction of the coil
current, thus producing an opposing magnetic field, growing with a
time constant related to the inductance of the single “turn” around
the axis and the resistance of the electrolyte; when the coil magnetic
field moves to the next coil, the thus-magnetized electrolyte will be
attracted to it, with its magnetic field potentially diminishing with
the same time constant.  Energizing the coil behind it with the
opposing direction of current will also help.

The movement speed of the applied magnetic field needs to bear a
certain relation to the movement speed of the liquid and the RL time
constant of the induced eddy current.  If the field moves too fast
(e.g., 100 000 m/s), the eddy currents induced in the liquid will not
have time to build up to a level where they can produce an appreciable
magnetic force; indeed, the magnetic field will be confined to the
skin of the electrolyte by the skin effect.  (Am I misunderstanding
this?  Perhaps large eddy currents occur almost instantly and the
magnetic field penetrates more deeply as they begin to die away?)  On
the other hand, if the field moves too slowly (e.g., 1 μm/s), the eddy
currents will have decayed to very low levels before the applied
magnetic field moves to the next coil.  Somewhere in between is a
sweet spot.

It may be more efficient to use a small tubes to get a more
concentrated magnetic field or large tubes to get less viscous losses,
to use concentric tubes separating liquid layers to force the eddy
currents in the outer parts of the liquid to enclose a large area of
magnetic flux, to use an annular tube with just an air space in the
middle for the same reason, and perhaps even to replace that air space
with something like ferrite — although perhaps that would result in
increasing the force on the ferrite rather than the liquid.

A centrifugal magnetic stirrer
------------------------------

As an alternative to magnetohydrodynamic motors, you could drive a
solid impeller.

Chemistry labs nowadays commonly use magnetic stirrers, often built
into hotplates.  These apply a magnetic field rotating at a few Hz to
the reaction vessel, typically an Erlenmeyer flask; a magnet moving
freely at the bottom of the vessel is free to rotate to align itself
with the rotating magnetic field.  (The magnet must be encapsulated in
something; I suspect teflon.)  This usually produces a substantial
amount of noise, but much less than a conventional motor driving a
gearbox which turns an impeller on a bearing-mounted shaft that passes
through a seal.  And, although it has a moving part, that moving part
has tolerances measured in centimeters, so wear is not much of a
problem.

You could apply the same approach to the ice vest, applying a rotating
magnetic field to rotate a solid impeller entirely contained inside
the liquid chamber; the low speeds involved (< 60 rpm) suggest the use
of a permanent-magnet-based impeller rather than something like a
squirrel cage.  To prevent the clattering noises common with
chemistry-lab magnetic stirrers, the impeller could be circular, like
a centrifugal blower, rather than oblong; a Tesla-turbine design might
work.  By giving it the same overall density as the liquid, balancing
the extra density of the permanent magnets by including air bubbles,
you could avoid stresses from impacts and changes in the direction of
gravity.

The magnets themselves might be sufficient to prevent its axis of
rotation from deviating too far from the axis of the pumping chamber
without requiring a shaft, and to prevent it from translating axially
until it hit a wall of the chamber; thus it could normally operate
without any solid-to-solid contact and thus without any wear.  Whether
the magnetic fields were radial (as in a squirrel-cage motor or
ordinary BLDC motor) or axial (as in a pancake motor), active position
control may be necessary to prevent instability that would cause it to
drift closer to some of the electromagnets until it hit a wall.
Perhaps fluid-bearing effects could be adequate to prevent this.

In some sense the ideal would be to have the highest MMF density and
thus flux density at the center of the pumping chamber rather than
near its walls, so that the magnet or magnets in the impeller would
tend to drift toward the center rather than toward the walls.  Given
that the coils applying the magnetic field are necessarily in the
walls, I’m not sure if this is feasible, but it might be a good start
to wrap the coils around the center of the chamber (e.g., in the *xz*
plane and the *yz* plane, if the *z*-axis is the rotation axis and the
origin is the center of the chamber — not parallel to those planes,
actually in them) rather than around cores outside its walls.

The use of a solid impeller would obviate the necessity for using an
electrolyte, allowing the use of less corrosive liquid coolants (see
file `coolants`) such as propylene glycol or a water–(propylene
glycol) mixture.  This in turn could perhaps enable the use of a bare
metal impeller without excessive corrosion, though I would think that
plastics such as PET would still be a better choice.

If the pumping chamber were spherical rather than cylindrical, the
impeller could rotate freely in it when the pump was being rotated in
space, thus avoiding collisions with the walls, even if the impeller
itself were still cylindrical (though it could be spherical as well,
like those spherical compasses people mounted on their car dashboards
in the 1980s).  The applied magnetic fields would eventually bring it
back into alignment for proper pumping action.

Pump energy use
---------------

Another reason to want to use a tiny, low-power pump is to reduce the
amount of heat added to the water from viscous friction.  If you're
using a 10-watt pump that's 50% efficient, it's adding 5 watts of
energy to the water, and so the water will heat up at 5 watts.  While
this is small compared to the total cooling load of a one-person ice
vest, it is not insignificant --- someone relaxing at 70 watts might
find that the reduction in "battery life" from 5 hours 17 minutes to 4
hours 56 minutes (on 4 kg of ice) was a significant loss.

An even bigger issue, though, is the weight of the battery used to
power the pump.  10 watts over 4 hours is 144 kJ, which is about 250 g
of lithium-ion batteries.  Reducing the pump power usage down below
the one-watt level, if it's possible, would lighten the battery weight
of the suit dramatically.

Pulsing
-------

As described in file `intermittent-fluid-flow-for-heat-transport`, a
pulsing flow is more effective than constant flow for this sort of
thing, because it distributes the coolth more evenly.  One way to
achieve this is to use a pump with several times the needed flow rate,
but only run it a small fraction of the time.  This results in higher
viscous losses (for a given tube diameter) but may be worth it.