Salt depresses the freezing point of water.  When you freeze salty
water, the behavior depends on whether you’re at, above, or below the
eutectic point, -21.1° and 27% NaCl.  If less saline than the eutectic
point, first you get ice crystals sucking up heat and growing without
much salt until the remaining brine is at the eutectic point, at which
point it freezes.  If more saline than the eutectic point, instead you
get salt crystals sucking up (much less) heat and growing without much
water until the remaining brine is at the eutectic point, at which
point it freezes.

On the other hand, if you have salty ice and you melt it partway, the
part that melts first will be the eutectic phase, leaving the
remaining phase (either water or salt) more concentrated in the
remaining crystals.  At this point you can mechanically separate the
two with an arbitrarily small energy input.

I was thinking that you could use this behavior somehow to get a
refrigerator, but now I’m not sure you can.  It seems like the
movement of mass into the eutectic phase is kind of unrecoverable by
freezing and melting.  Maybe you could separate them with a pressure
swing or by distillation.

Frozen salt water as a freezer thermal reservoir
------------------------------------------------

(This comes from a discussion with SpeedEvil on Freenode.)

But suppose you have a conventional freezer, cooled using a
conventional refrigeration approach like the compression-condensation
cycle or an ammonia-absorption cycle, and you'd like some resilience
against problems --- either power outages, as in file
`balcony-battery`, or mechanical failures.  A phase-change thermal
reservoir inside the freezer is one way to achieve this.

However, just putting water bottles in the freezer is suboptimal.
Normally the freezer is at -20° or so, and the water bottles won't
melt until 0°, which means that all your food also heats up to 0°,
possibly allowing it to spoil or get soggy.  A lower-temperature
phase-change material would work better, ideally something that melts
just above the freezer's normal temperature, like about -18° or so.

You could try using just near-eutectic NaCl salt water, but you run
the risk that, with repeated freeze-thaw cycles, it will separate ---
I didn't understand this until SpeedEvil explained it to me.

Suppose it's a little lower in salt content than the eutectic 27%.
Low-salt-content crystals will freeze first, concentrating the salt in
the remaining solution, and at -20°, you will be left with a large
amount of lower-salt-content crystals floating on top of the remaining
very-nearly-eutectic solution at the bottom.  If this system (because
"mess" sounds too unappealing) melts, the higher-salt-content water is
denser and thus will tend to stay at the bottom, although there will
be a small amount of diffusion at the boundary layer.  If it then
refreezes, the same thing will happen again, but this time the
initially-freezing crystals will be even lower in salt content, and
thus will freeze at an even higher temperature.

Repeated cycles of this will eventually separate the mixture into a
large amount of very-nearly-eutectic mix at the bottom, which never
freezes, and a small amount of very-nearly-pure water at the top,
which freezes far too easily, separated by a very thin diffusion
layer.

I think one possible cure is to make it a little *higher* in salt
content than the eutectic 27%, so that the crystals that freeze first
are higher in salt content than the eutectic, concentrating water in
the bottom.  (I'm assuming that the crystals will still be water
crystals and not salt; if not, this won't work!)  This way, when the
system melts again, the denser, saltier water liberated from the
crystals at the top of the solution will not be stable in that
position --- it will produce convection cells that carry it back
toward the bottom of the tank.  This should provide some mixing, but
I'm not sure if it will be enough.

Another possible cure, of course, is to use an impeller or a spoon to
mix the liquid when there is liquid.

A third possibility is to immobilize the whole solution in some kind
of gel, such as agar, so that the crystals cannot float or sink.  This
way, the physical distance between the different phases of crystals
remains small enough to prevent diffusion.  Over time, though, I think
crystal formation in repeated freeze cycles will cut the gel matrix to
shreds.

A fourth possibility is to use a Peltier cooler on top of the
salt-water tank inside the freezer to drop it an extra 2° relative to
the rest of the freezer.  This is a relatively small temperature
difference and a small heat flux, so the Peltier cooler should be
relatively efficient, although its waste heat does add to the
freezer's load.

A fifth possibility is to find another material whose aqueous solution
has a slightly warmer eutectic point, one toward the bottom end of the
freezer's normal temperature range.  There are an abundance of
inexpensive and nontoxic salts, acids, and bases that might work.
Surely there is a database of their eutectic points somewhere.

A sixth possibility is to just run the freezer a bit cooler, perhaps
cooling the brine tank directly and arranging things so that heat from
the outer walls diffuses first through the food and then into the
brine tank, thus keeping the food a bit warmer than the brine tank.

Why freezer thermal stores are important
----------------------------------------

Solar photovoltaic energy is on track to be by far the cheapest source
of energy to date, but energy storage --- especially kilowatt-scale
energy storage --- is not cheap.  If you can run your freezer only on
sunny days, when energy is abundant, you can save yourself or your
municipality the need to use scarce cloudy-day or scarcer nighttime
energy to keep your food cold.  The kind of phase-change thermal
reservoir discussed above is about two or four orders of magnitude
cheaper than batteries, which are still US$100 to US$200 per kilowatt
hour (US$30 to US$60 per megajoule).

Why do I say such a thermal store would be cheaper?  According to file
`climate-control`, water's heat of fusion is 333 kJ/kg, so 3 kg per
megajoule --- at the US$0.58/kℓ cost for expensive reverse-osmosis
water from Sorek cited in file `desalination-comment`, water costs
US$0.0017 per 3 liters and thus per megajoule.  Adding a controlled
amount of salt might add a bit to that cost, but I don't think it's
more than an order of magnitude.  According to file `minimal-food`,
supermarket salt cost AR$41.65 per kg in 2012 when AR$16 was US$1, so
that's almost US$3 per kg, or US$1 per 3-kg megajoule; but I'm pretty
sure bulk rock salt is at least one order of magnitude cheaper than
that.

A freezer designed for use in this way would probably be a bit larger
than the freezers we currently use.
