One problem that can happen with sampled sounds is a discontinuity at
the end of the sample.  If the sample is long enough, this sounds like
a click, but a short sample (e.g. a single oscillation of a waveform)
can turn it into a sawtooth buzz, one that can overwhelm the rest of
the signal.

One tool available in old MOD trackers was time-reversal of the
sample, so instead of playing the wavetable from beginning to end
repeatedly, it would play boustrophedonically, first from beginning to
end, then backwards from end to beginning, and then repeat.  This
approach eliminates the discontinuity.  It also cuts the size of your
wavetable in half.

Audacity has a “zero-crossing finding” tool on the Z key which adjusts
your selection boundaries to the nearest positive-going zero crossing.
This also helps with the same problem.

The boustrophedon approach has an interesting effect on the signal,
though.  Since the resulting waveform is reflection-symmetric, it can
only contain cosine waves; the phase of all the signal components is
forced to zero, or rather all imaginary components are canceled,
because the time-reversed part of the signal has conjugated phase.
(All harmonics of the period of the doubled-length wavetable are
possible, though.)  So the extent to which a partial makes it through
this procedure is dependent on its phase — if it happens to have
perfectly real phase, it’s untouched, but if it happens to have
perfectly imaginary phase, it’s entirely canceled.  This means that
filtering a signal with an allpass filter before this procedure can
radically change the frequency content on the output, even though the
signal going in may sound identical.

I propose a probably known extension to the procedure: rather than
repeat(wavetable[1:] || reverse(wavetable)[1:]), use
repeat(wavetable[1:] || reverse(wavetable)[1:] || 2·wavetable[0] -
(wavetable[1:] || reverse(wavetable)[1:])), reversing the sample both
in time and in sign, eliminating the discontinuity in the derivative
at the beginning of the wavetable (though not its end) and extending
the generated waveform to four times the length of the wavetable.
This allows the generated waveform to contain all of its period’s
harmonics with any phase, rather than just real phases, and it cuts in
half again the number of samples needed to represent a waveform of a
given fundamental frequency.

For example, a 440-Hz A note at a sampling rate of 16kHz (a common
rate in MODs) would require a wavetable of 36.3636 samples for a full
oscillation; a 36-sample version of this wave would be out of tune by
1%, which sounds inconsequential but is 17 cents, easily audible.  So
you’d probably use three oscillations, 109 samples, which gives you
440.37 Hz, only off by 1.4 cents.  If you try to use this approach
with ¾ of an oscillation, it will work, but you’re constrained to 27
or 28 samples, corresponding to 108 or 112 samples in the full
three-period time, which would be 36 or 37⅓ samples per oscillation.

I was thinking that you could choose to duplicate the initial/final
sample of a segment, or not, to correct this detuning, but I think
that probably a better way to inexpensively tune up or down by
fractions of a semitone is to occasionally duplicate or omit samples
at points where the sample value and, especially, derivative are zero
or nearly so.  I don’t know how this will sound, but maybe if it works
well enough, you could represent an arbitrary 440Hz harmonic sound
with a 12-sample 16ksps wavetable.  This is very appealing not just
because it takes 24 bytes but because optimizing over a 12-dimensional
space, whether in the frequency domain or the time domain, whether by
hand or using an algorithm, seems much more tractable than optimizing
over a 109-dimensional space.

For images, you can use this kind of approach to make a smoothly
tiling texture out of any image by reflecting it at the border.  A
kaleidoscope works this way; the tiling need not be square but it does
need to have only vertices of even degree, which probably limits you
to variants of square and triangular tilings.

You can also use this approach to make smoothly stretching display
window frames from a single example: by inserting reflected sections
into the middle of stretched dimensions as necessary, you can make the
window whatever size you want, down to the minimum of the original
drawing.  You won't introduce discontinuities in colors, but you may
introduce discontinuities in line angles; if you can choose preferred
direction-reversal points where the lines are all either perpendicular
or parallel to the edge, you can keep that to a minimum, but you may
not be able to eliminate it entirely.
