Some extensions of William Beaty’s scratch holograms
====================================================

William Beaty’s scratch holograms can be extended using dithering and
noncircular scratch paths to support arbitrary movement and brightness
change, with artistic and archival applications.

Gradients and disorganized abrasives
------------------------------------

A piecewise-linear interpolation of scratch direction and density over
a surface will give rise to nonlinear and, in general, noncircular
scratch paths; this may be feasible to fabricate using disorganized
abrasive embedded in a soft matrix, such as a piece of felt or rubber,
which is moved in several passes over the surface to scratch.  Due to
the elasticity of the matrix, displacements of the matrix parallel to
the surface vary the amount of pressure transmitted through the
abrasive to the surface, and this varies the scratch density (number
of scratches and average scratch width).  Spatially varying this
perpendicular displacement throughout the matrix, which is to say
holding it slightly nonparallel to the surface, will result in a
spatial scratch density gradient on the surface; temporally varying
the displacement will also result in a spatial scratch gradient, but
along the direction of movement.  Both techniques can be used in
concert to maximize scratch density gradient sharpness by moving the
matrix parallel to the matrix.  Nonparallel movement will blur the
gradient, which may be desirable to prevent the faithful reproduction
of mechanical errors such as unwanted vibration.  Moving the matrix
along an in-general-nonlinear path without rotating it will result in
the scratches from a given point in time all being parallel, like the
parking-lot floating polishing glove image mentioned in Beaty’s
original notes, but rotating it around an axis more or less parallel
to the surface will cause the scratch paths from one side of the
matrix to the other to vary in both direction and radius of curvature.

By combining these gradient effects, it should be possible to rapidly
fabricate scratch holograms that reproduce an arbitrary
continuously-varying set of monochrome images to fairly high precision
when viewed or illuminated from different angles; this goes beyond
merely fabricating a hologram of a single physical object viewed from
different angles and includes, for example, arbitrary animations,
though animations with only a single (possibly cyclic) temporal
dimension.

If the matrix is not soft, being for example steel or pitch, the
perpendicular displacement directly controls scratch depth and
density, rather than indirectly through pressure.  This requires more
precise positional control.

Alternative scratch fabrication tools
-------------------------------------

Randomly positioned abrasive is not the only thing that could be used
this way.  A single-point cutting or forming tool could also be moved
over the workpiece in a controllably curved path by an analogous
mechanism: mounted on a wheel whose rotation angle is precisely
controlled as a gantry or other two-degree-of-freedom mechanism moves
the wheel’s center over the work.  (A hardened-steel glass-cutting
wheel might make an adequate tool for forming lines in the surface of
a softer metal, or cutting them in glass.)  A series of regularly
spaced points would also work; for example, you could use the edge of
a saw blade held nearly parallel to the workpiece surface, controlling
the angle and curvature of the blade as you drag it over the surface
to scratch it, using a six- or seven-degree-of-freedom control
mechanism.  And you might be able to use a rotary brush of
aluminum-oxide-particle-impregnated nylon — either rotating around an
axis parallel to the surface to make straight scratches at a given
angle, or even rotating non-parallel to the surface to make elliptical
scratch arcs.

Media
-----

More highly reflective surfaces, such as metals, are of course more
desirable.  Grinding copper flat, then electropolishing it, then
engraving the hologram with abrasive, then plating it in silver,
chrome, or nickel, should enable very high contrast ratios.  Aluminum
might be easier to form.  Glass is in some ways the optimal material,
having no grain size or work-hardening to worry about, but getting it
to be highly reflective requires some kind of silvering process,
nowadays typically by vacuum sputtering.  If this is not done, objects
on the other side of the glass may be clearly visible, and for some
applications — such as superimposing a sort of hardcopy alternate
reality view on an object, for example for measurement purposes — this
could be desirable.

Metallic media can perhaps be mass-duplicated by electrotyping, but
molding, as is done for vinyl phonorecords or diffraction gratings
from the Grating Lab, is probably a better process.  The molded
reproductions can then be silvered through sputtering, as gratings
are.

Color
-----

By adding color filters over the surface, ideally after scratching,
some color should be possible, although it means that scratch density
needs to vary in phase with the color-filter variation to get color,
which requires much higher spatial frequencies than would otherwise be
needed, thus substantially increasing fabrication time.  The R-G-B-G
checkerboard used in modern digital cameras might be ideal in some
sense, but using parallel strips (either R-G-B-G, R-G-B, or R-G-B-W as
in some modern LCDs) would reduce the scratching problem.  If the
surface is titanium, chrome, or stainless steel, iridescent oxide
layers may be an adequate way to apply color filters.

Oil films
---------

At the extreme of soft materials, it should be possible to produce
most of these effects in a film of oil or grease on a smooth surface,
such as glass or PMMA, without using abrasives or cutting tools at
all; a soft rubber squeegee is adequate.  Such a temporary hologram
might serve as a frame of an animated display or as a temporary
hardcopy.  In time the minimal surface tension of oil will erase the
images.

Virtually transparent opaque polyhedra
--------------------------------------

It should be possible to apply these effects to more than one side of
a polished metal polyhedron or convex curve to produce
parallax-correct views of a three-dimensional object within, though
with only a single dimension of parallax.  The illusion will be that
of seeing a luminous object within the polyhedron through the metal
surface, as if it were merely a wire frame enclosing the object.

Archival
--------

Of course the usual archival applications exist; by virtue of
scattering light directionally, a scratch that is only half a micron
in width and a few microns long becomes brilliantly visible from a
certain angle.  Under ordinary sunlight viewing conditions, a single
sheet of material can encode some 300 different images at illumination
angles differing by half a degree (180 degrees / ½ degree minus a
safety factor), or perhaps more if the contrast-enhancement techniques
in file `analemma-sundial` are applied.  Art-gallery viewing
conditions, with a more directional light source than the sun and a
background that is much darker than the blue sky, could permit many
more images to be encoded.

10-micron household aluminum foil, shiny on one side, with 300 images
encoded at 300 dpi and one bit per pixel, would provide archival bit
density of 42 gigabits per square meter and
4.2 petabits per cubic meter with this approach; scaled down to the
size of Paul Atreides’ Orange Catholic Bible, that’s 4.2 gigabits per
cubic centimeter.  But such a delicate medium as 10-μm annealed
aluminum is difficult to handle without creasing it, and the
electrostatic page-selection mechanism described in *Dune* is
unfortunately probably not feasible outside of fiction.

The 100-μm forged aluminum used for drink cans can withstand rough
handling, but it is surely overkill for this application.  30-μm
aluminum flashing is probably adequate and can be polished on both
sides.  This would provide 2.8 gigabits per cubic centimeter.

By this method you could produce a book, readable with the naked eye
in direct sunlight, safe to handle with bare hands, using inexpensive
materials (but very expensive fabrication techniques), that will last
millennia under reasonable archival conditions, which at 130 mm ×
80 mm × 10 mm contains 290 gigabits of data, 36 gigabytes.  If we want
it to use normal lettering, we probably need about 3×6 pixels per
letter at least, so that would be only 16 billion letters of text,
about 3 billion words.  This is about a third the size of English
Wikipedia.

More aggressive specifications might use 600 dpi and 1200 images
rather than 300, thus requiring a light four times more directional
than the sun, such as a sunbeam entering an otherwise dark room
through a peephole or vertical slit.  This would enable sixteen times
greater information density but would probably require a magnifying
glass to read.

For mass production of such holographic archival devices, perhaps a
plastic film could first be molded (as described above) out of an
archival-safe thermoplastic such as PET, then silvered with aluminum
in a vacuum.
