Since self-replicating automata entered the fictional literature in
Samuel Butler’s Erehwon, humans have been concerned that their
uncontrolled replication could be dangerous; notable examples include
Karel Čapek’s “R. U. R.”, Lem’s “Invincible”, Dick’s “Second Variety”,
Drexler’s “gray goo”, Star Control 2’s “Slylandro Probe”, and, in a
way, Goethe’s sorcerer’s apprentice’s broom.  And, of course, our
experience with biological self-replicating systems includes numerous
troublesome examples of exponential self-replication, including locust
plagues, cancer, all kinds of infectious diseases, toxic algal blooms,
mold infestations, ant and other insect infestations, rats in cities,
and cane toads in Australia.  In computers, self-replicating code and
related phenomena have caused many problems, from the TFTP “Sorcerer’s
Apprentice Syndrome” and the accidental fork bomb to the helminthiasis
of the internet (the “Morris worm”); nowadays, self-replicating code
is a mainstay both of computer security attacks (where it is often
called a worm) and defense (where it is often called a security patch
or security update).

Our experience with biological systems, however, is misleading when it
comes to mechanical systems.  If you want to design a self-replicating
mechanical system to have a high degree of assurance that it won’t
continue running on its own, consuming more resources than anyone
wanted to produce more replicas of the system than anyone wanted,
there are a variety of strategies you can employ without unduly
limiting the system's intentional uses.

1. Large size.

    One reason that cancer is such a problem in animals is that we are
    made from trillions of essentially autonomous units, each capable of
    self-replication, most of which (except for red blood cells) do in
    fact self-replicate in the regular course of events.  This provides
    hundreds of trillions of opportunities for exponential
    self-replication to arise during the lifetime of a single organism.

    By contrast, we can design the self-replication process of a robot to
    use convergent assembly, in which the minimal self-replicating unit is
    very large — rather than the tens of microns of a typical eukaryotic
    cell, it could be hundreds of millimeters, or even more than a meter,
    in diameter.  This lowers whatever risk of exponential replication may
    exist by a factor of about a quadrillion.

    By using convergent assembly, in which the robot contains many small
    manipulators producing parts to be assembled by asmaller number of
    larger manipulators, it is possible to obtain this desirable large
    size without paying an excessive cost in replication time, though this
    is not intuitive from examining biological models such as elephants,
    humans, or whales, with their perilously low fertility rates.

2. Broadcast architecture.

    Rather than keeping a copy of the full program to build a new robot
    inside of each robot, as cells do, it has been suggested (originally
    by Laing, I think, as a way to reduce the size of the robot) to store
    the program in a centralized transmitter, broadcasting the subprogram
    for each stage in the process to all of the robots at once.  In this
    way, no robot ever contains the full construction program at once; if
    the central transmitter ceases to transmit, perhaps because a human
    has hit the red EMERGENCY STOP button, the entire replication process
    will cease.

    Concern about the space used for the program might seem quaint today
    when the system-on-a-chip the Raspberry Pi is built around has a
    gigabyte of RAM.  However, this may be purely an artifact of our
    primitive macroscopic fabrication technology — semiconductor fabs are
    optimized for efficiently producing consumer products, so the
    wire-sawing process used to dice wafers has unacceptable waste below a
    scale of a millimeter or so.  With self-replication, we may be able to
    usefully reduce robot size below the level where each autonomous unit
    contains space for hundreds of thousands of memory bits.

    From a certain point of view, a convergent-assembly desktop factory is
    a broadcast-architecture machine — after all, what distinguishes the
    smallest manipulators from autonomous replicators is precisely that
    they are fixed in place in a larger assembly governed by a larger
    program they do not have access to.

3. Manual process steps.

    If the replication process turns a bucket of dirt and rocks into a
    bunch of robots, a simple way to prevent the process from running amok
    is to only fill the bucket through human intervention.  For example,
    if the bucket is mounted on top of the replicator, a person could
    shovel dirt and rocks into it with a shovel.  At a larger scale, the
    person could use a backhoe or a manually operated hydraulic excavator
    or power shovel capable of depositing hundreds of tons of material in
    a single operation.

    The manual process step need not be the initial raw-material handling
    step; having a person manually pick up a bucket of finished parts from
    an autonomous digging part-fabricating robot and dump them into the
    parts hopper of an assembly robot would work too.  If the human
    stopped carrying parts buckets, no further replicas would be produced.
    At the extreme, you could require a single human-executed final
    assembly step, such as installing a fuse or a magic word behind the
    robot's teeth, in order to bring the fully-assembled robot to life.

    However, the raw-material extraction step of the process is the step
    most likely to cause damage to nearby objects such as buildings, other
    machinery, or humans, so it is the step most desirable to automate.

4. Alternation of generations.

    If robot type A is well-suited to producing robot type B, and vice
    versa, but neither is well-suited to produce others of its own type,
    then it is possible to employ either type of robots to produce an
    arbitrary quantity of the other type of robot, or other articles,
    without ever enabling exponential growth.  Exponential growth is only
    possible if replication of both robots is possible at once — both
    construction programs and all the necessary raw materials must be
    present.

    Alternation of generations may be desirable for material-processing
    reasons as well.  RepRaps and similar FDM machines cannot replicate
    themselves from raw materials because, among other things, they cannot
    manufacture their hotends (extrusion nozzles), because the hotends
    necessarily remain solid at temperatures that melt the thermoplastic
    extruded through them.

    Moses, Yamaguchi, and Chirikjian refer to this kind of alternation of
    generations as a “cyclic fabrication system”, saying, “It is cyclic in
    the way the game ‘rock-paper-scissors’ is cyclic: tools, materials,
    and fabrication processes are chosen such that one process creates
    tools used in the next process…” They suggest prototyping using a hard
    two-part polyurethane resin which can be cast in wax molds, which in
    turn can easily be machined by fully-hardened polyurethane; or using a
    low-melting metal alloy to make mandrels on which to electrodeposit
    softer but higher-melting metals such as copper and nickel.