One problem that society has always faced is that its members
selfishly choose to conform to social norms instead of altruistically
doing unique things.  Individuals usually benefit from merely
following the herd — the herd is usually headed in a safe direction,
and often the nail that sticks up gets hammered down.  But the herd’s
choice of direction is critically dependent on its members steering it
away from danger, which they cannot do if they are merely following
it.

This is true across many fields — mainstream investments are safe
because some investors use their investment sense some of the time;
mainstream morals are not completely depraved because some moral
actors use their moral sense some of the time; mainstream science is
mostly correct because some scientists use their critical thinking
abilities some of the time; and so on.

But that’s not the only benefit of nonconformity.  There are many
fields of human action where the value of an effort is precisely in
its uniqueness.  Copying an existing painting is of relatively little
value; painting something new is valuable, especially if the product
is successful, as few are.  (The majority of novel paintings are in
themselves worthless, but their very worthlessness is educational.)
Repeating an already-proposed hypothesis, reimplementing an
already-written program, or replicating an already-performed
experiment is of some value, but not nearly as much value as proposing
a new hypothesis, writing a novel program, or performing a new
experiment, at least if they are successful.  Advances are made by
people doing things that nobody else has done yet, by originality.

Even aside from enterprises where originality is not a *sine qua non*,
specialization is enormously economically beneficial, and that’s true
even if you leave money out of it.  People are simply more productive
when they work in a narrow area where they have developed very deep
skills, cultivated deep relationships, and acquired or gained access
to specialized capital goods that improve the productivity of that
area.  But such specialization unavoidably requires a more diverse set
of occupations.

In the limit of job specialization, every person is doing a job that
nobody else in the world is doing.  Jason Evans, for example, is the
maintainer of the jemalloc memory allocator, one of the
highest-performance general-purpose allocators, used in many pieces of
software by a few billion people.  Nobody else knows as much about
jemalloc as he does, despite his efforts to explain it to people.
Anyone can use and modify it (it’s free software) but if you need to
debug a performance problem with it or want to add features to it, he
can very likely achieve this with less effort than anyone else can.

Finally, there are rival resources that can serve many more people if
their tastes differ.  If you prefer cafés with loud music, and I
prefer cafés with no music, we will tend to go to different cafés.
That sort of thing prevents everyone from just going to the single
best café, which would then be either overcrowded or (to my taste
anyway) oversized.

Unfortunately, in every society, many people are too selfish to
manifest their uniqueness.  Because they merely imitate others, the
society is robbed of the originality they could have produced; its
choices are poorer, sometimes fatally so, because it is guided by
fewer minds; its economic productivity is vastly lower than it could
be, because of underspecialization; and its rival resources are
oversubscribed.

There are always social rewards for conformity and punishments for
nonconformity, but these undermine the very fabric of society.
Ironically, in many societies, nonconformity is confused with
selfishness (perhaps because it seems arrogant) and conformity with
altruism, but in fact it is impossible to be simultaneously altruistic
and conform.

Uniqueness involves risk.  Most new things fail.  Most new ideas are
wrong.  Most dissenters from the scientific consensus are mistaken.
For every abolitionist or pacifist, who dissent from society’s moral
consensus, there are five rapists of children.  If you order a dish
your friend knows is tasty, you won’t get an inedible dinner.  If you
drive a truck, like millions of others, instead of writing your own
memory allocator, you have a pretty good idea what the job market is
like.  Jason Evans worked on a bunch of unique software projects
before he hit on one that got adopted by billions of people and
created the unique occupation of Jemalloc Maintainer for him.

Traditional societies, since the advent of agriculture, have lived
close to the Malthusian population limit.  They could not tolerate
much risk.  Poor people even today can’t tolerate much risk, so the
burden of uniqueness falls on the middle and upper classes.  But as a
civilization we are blessed with so much abundance that we are
collectively capable of absorbing much more risk than before by
allowing people to be unique — and when we do, everyone benefits.

(Inspired by
<http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2015/02/18/a-dent-in-the-universe/>.)
