There is a constant-time way to hash the value of a mutable set
container, which converts some algorithms from O(N²) to O(N).

A mutable set container of T is an abstract data type whose value is,
at any given time, some set of values of type T; typically these
support constant-time member addition, member removal, membership
testing, and iteration over the items contained.

Often these don’t guarantee a particular iteration order because they
are implemented, for example, using hash tables, which may shrink with
some hysteresis to preserve the performance guarantee for iteration.
[The data structure Nayuki calls the Binary Array
Set](https://www.nayuki.io/page/binary-array-set) is a non-hash-table
mutable set container structure which can be iterated much more
efficiently in some arbitrary order.

I am trying to be careful in this essay to distinguish sets, which are
immutable mathematical objects, from set containers, whose value at
any given moment is a set, but which contain different sets at
different times — the relationship is that a set is a possible state
of a set container.

Hashing sets: a more efficient approach
---------------------------------------

In Python, *immutable* sets are hashable (if their items are), which
is a frequently useful feature, but often inefficient — making an
immutable set from what Python calls a mutable set (what I’m calling a
mutable set container) involves iterating over all the items.

To make the values of a mutable set container efficiently hashable,
XOR together the hash values of all of its items, then perform some
one-to-one transformation that doesn’t commute with XOR, such as
adding or multiplying some large constant, or computing its SHA-256 or
Blake2.  This (except for the final transformation) can be done
incrementally as items are added and removed, and it will always
produce the same value for the same set of items, regardless of how
the set was arrived at.

The final transformation here is to ensure that related sets such as
{1, {2, 3}}, {1, 2, {3}}, and {{{1, 2, 3}}} all have different hash
values, a feature which seems likely to be desirable in practice.

Doing it this way rather than the standard Python way will convert
some O(N²) algorithms into O(N) algorithms.  If you add N items to a
set container one at a time, each time testing a set of hashes to see
if you may have seen the current state of the container before, this
will take θ(N) time with this approach, but Θ(N²) time with the Python
approach.

16-bit example
--------------

As a 16-bit example, if your set is {4, 5, 8}, your hash function for
integers is multiplying by 33947 mod 2¹⁶, and your final
transformation is adding the random number 48709 mod 2¹⁶, then you
compute ((4 · 33947) ⊕ (5 · 33947) ⊕ (8 · 33947)) + 48709 mod 2¹⁶, so
the set’s hash value is 19970.  If you store the quantity ((4 · 33947)
⊕ (5 · 33947) ⊕ (8 · 33947)) mod 2¹⁶ = 36797 in a variable in the
mutable set container, and you add 10 to the set, you can
incrementally update it by XORing in 10 · 33947 mod 2¹⁶ = 11790 into
it, getting 36797 as the new untransformed hash value; upon request,
you can return it with 48709 added, giving 19970.  If you then remove
4 from the container, you can XOR 4 · 33947 % 2¹⁶ = 4716 into the
variable, getting 40401, which you can verify is ((5 · 33947) ⊕ (8 ·
33947) ⊕ (10 · 33947)) % 2¹⁶.

(The ⊕ character is standard math notation for the XOR operation.)

Minor variants
--------------

(Alternatively, you can sum the hash values of the items, then use a
final transformation that doesn’t commute with addition, such as bit
rotation or XOR with a constant.)

If your item hash functions and final transformation are
cryptographically secure hashes, then you would be justified in
concluding that two states of the container are equal if their hashes
are equal, without iterating over their items.

Possible uses for incrementally hashing sets
--------------------------------------------

You might argue that it isn’t very helpful for you to keep around a
hash value for a no-longer-current state of a mutable set
container — certainly it isn’t useful as a way of finding the set
container in a hash table, for example.  And in the common case where
you don't use a cryptographically secure hash, there’s the chance of
hash collisions.

However, there are uses for this.

One possible use for this technique is in incrementally optimizing NFA
execution by partial compilation to DFAs (each DFA state corresponds
to a set of NFA states), which can in the worst case produce a memory
usage explosion — but if only state-sets that occur many times are
compiled to DFA states, then the problem is much less severe.  If you
snapshot states that appear in a list (or Bloom filter) of previously
seen hashes, then you can recognize them if they come around again.

Another possible use for this technique is in memoizing set
arithmetic: if you have already computed the union, intersection, or
set-subtraction of two sets, you may be able to avoid iterating over
the set items to compute them again.

A third use is in implementing operations on finite binary relations
represented as sets of pairs — operations which, in addition to the
set-arithmetic operations mentioned above, might include composition,
converse, transitive closure, and various kinds of products.

A fourth, very general, use is in combination with a transaction log.
If you maintain a transaction log in a layer on top of a basic mutable
set container that supports both insertion and deletion, listing the
additions and deletions in the log, you can hash positions in the
transaction log, and the state at each of these positions is
retrievable in time bounded by the size of the transaction log.  This
means you can add N items to a set container one at a time, making a
hash table of the N successive sets that are the states of the
container, in Θ(N) time, and then retrieve any state from the table in
Θ(N) time.

This kind of undo/redo journal approach is a very general and
efficient approach for obtaining FP-persistent† semantics on top of
ephemeral data structures.  If you bound the transaction log size, you
can preserve constant-time guarantees for access, but then when the
journal gets too large, you need to copy the whole data structure to a
new one with a fresh journal.

In the scenario given, if the transaction log size is k, you can
retrieve any state in at most k steps, but you need to copy the hash
table (in the limit, of average size N/2) ⌊N/k⌋ times, requiring N²/2k
work inserting and deleting.  Depending on the relative frequency of
probes and updates, and in particular the frequency of access to very
old states, this approach can often save several orders of magnitude
of performance — not an asymptotic improvement, to be sure, but good
enough in many cases.

Note that the Binary Array Set structure mentioned above can be viewed
as a special case of this approach, where the update log is sorted
into increasingly larger arrays.

Other approaches to hashing states of mutable set containers efficiently
------------------------------------------------------------------------

A different approach is to store the sets in a trie, or in a binary
search tree with a convergent tree balancing algorithm, like the
jumprope data structure used for sets of large strings — convergent in
the sense that a tree containing the same set of items will always be
balanced in the same way.  This way, the hash can be computed on each
treenode, which additionally enables hash-consing, especially useful
for FP-persistent data structures.

A third approach is to compute a bloom filter of some fixed parameters
(or with some fixed sets of parameters) for the items in the set,
rather than XORing their raw hash values together; then you can hash
the Bloom filter by, for example, adding its words together at hash
time.  The bloom filter may be only a few words long (say, 64 or 128
bits) and yet effective under many circumstances, but there are
difficult tradeoffs around expected set size.

This approach has the additional benefit that you can directly compute
bloom filters for unions and intersections, though not set
subtractions, and the bloom filter may speed up membership tests.
Bloom filters’ Achilles heel is their lack of support for deletion.

-----

† “Persistent” unfortunately has two conflicting meanings when it
comes to data structures; functional programmers use it to mean that
modifying the data structure does not make its previous states
inaccessible.  By “FP-persistent” I mean this meaning, not the more
common meaning of “retrievable after rebooting your computer”.