There are a couple of algorithms for computing a linear-time sliding
RMQ (“range minimum query”): [the ascending minima algorithm][0] and
the van Herk/Gil–Werman algorithm.  The ascending-minima algorithm is
interesting in that all of its comparisons of data (as opposed to
indices) are comparisons against the most recent datum: you run all
your input data through a deque, which you maintain in ascending order
by popping items off its back when they slide out of the window and
off its front when they are higher than the new datum.

[0]: http://richardhartersworld.com/cri/2001/slidingmin.html

This occurs to me as an interesting way to compute a “top event of the
month” kind of list: add new events as they come in, removing any
older events that are less significant and any events that, though
more significant, are older than a month.  At the end of the month,
you simply write down the oldest event in the list, which is more
significant than anything that came before it and at least as
significant as anything that followed.  This could work for personal
achievements as well as news events; it has the characteristic that
one of the events you’re comparing is always the current event, which
you presumably have uppermost in your consciousness.  Unfortunately,
both news events and personal achievements share the characteristic
that it’s often hard to determine their significance until after the
fact.

There are some interesting tweaks to be made on the ascending-minima
algorithm.

If you aren’t space-limited, you could put the items on a stack rather
than a deque; rather than shifting items off the left end of a deque,
you can just increment an “oldest” pointer up the stack.  The ultimate
contents of the stack are the global minimum, the minimum of all the
items that followed it, the minimum of all the items that followed
*it*, and so on.  These are the range minima of all possible ranges
that end at the end of the entire event sequence.

Suppose we push in the normal way, but “pop” from the stack not by
physically removing events but merely by updating a predecessor
pointer on the newly added item.  The physical sequence of the stack,
then, will be the entire event sequence, augmented with predecessor
pointers that enable rapid traversal of all the possible ranges ending
at the end of the entire event sequence.  These predecessor pointers
convert the stack into a concise tree representation of the state of
the stack at every point in time.  This enables us to answer any range
minimum query in expected logarithmic time: we start with the event at
the end of the desired range, then follow its predecessor pointers
until they lead us outside the desired range.  The item whose
predecessor pointer led us outside the desired range is, then, the
range minimum.

If we furthermore update each “popped” item with the time when it was
popped, then we can find in constant time the largest interval it was
the minimum of: it was the minimum from the moment following its
predecessor until it was popped.

To be concrete, to compute the predecessors array, we can do the
following, in Python notation:

    js = [None] * len(xs)

    for i in range(1, len(xs)):
        js[i] = i-1
        while js[i] is not None and xs[js[i]] >= xs[i]:
            js[i] = js[js[i]]

And to use it to find the index k of the minimal element in some
nonempty [i, j):

    k = j-1
    while js[k] is not None and js[k] >= i:
        k = js[k]

The van Herk/Gil–Werman algorithm computes the sliding RMQ (for a
single window width) of the pixels in O(N) linear time, while this
takes O(N log M) time, where M is the window size.  If you have a
fixed number of window sizes before you start the algorithm, you could
compute them in linear time (each) by walking their respective
pointers up the stack as you pass over the input pixels, thus avoiding
the logarithmic-time slowdown from computing them after the fact.

I’m not sure how the performance of this approach compares to Urbach
and Wilkinson’s 2008 chord-table algorithm (doi 10.1.1.442.4549,
“Efficient 2-D Grayscale Morphological Transformations With Arbitrary
Flat Structuring Elements”.)  Their objective is to compute sliding
RMQ for a set of “chord lengths” or window sizes for each scan line;
they do this by augmenting the set of chord lengths with enough powers
of 2 to reach the longest chord length; they start with trivial case
of window size 1, and then, to compute sliding RMQ for each larger
window size R(i) as T[i, ...] from already-computed results for window
size R(i-1) in T[i-1, ...] — R(i-1) is guaranteed to be at least half
of R(i) due to the augmentation with the powers of 2 — they compute d
= R(i) - R(i-1) and then compute each result pixel T[i, x] = T[i-1, x]
∧ T[i-1, x+d], where ∧ is the pairwise-minimum operation.

So, for example, the chord-table algorithm will compute a sliding RMQ
result for the window starting at position 71 with a window size of 18
(T[R⁻¹(18), 71]) from two previously computed results with a window
size of 16, we can take T[R⁻¹(16), 71] and T[R⁻¹(16), 73].  These two
16-pixel windows overlap by all but two pixels, which is harmless.  In
many cases the chord-table algorithm will compute more window sizes
than necessary, but the computation for each window size is very
regular, while the computation of the predecessor array described
above is very irregular, even if a known set of window sizes is being
pursued.  In particular, it should be trivially possible to vectorize
the chord-table algorithm, computing results for 16 or 32 scan lines
in parallel.

(Urbach and Williamson’s paper actually writes T_y(i, x, r), but the
extra parameters r and y are, as far as I can tell, not actually
useful; the chord table for each scan line is computed entirely
independently.)

Returning to the problem of computing a backward-looking greatest
achievement of the month, we can of course compute the
backward-looking greatest achievement of the past 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16
days, each by comparing the greatest achievement from the smaller
number of days to the achievement in the previous window — for
instance, comparing the greatest achievement of the last 8 days with
the previously-computed greatest achievement of the previous 8 days in
order to compute the greatest achievement of the last 16 days.  Then
for a given month we simply use two overlapping 16-day windows.  This
is clearly more work than the ascending-minima algorithm, requiring as
it does 5 comparisons per day rather than 2.  However, a
sliding-window algorithm is unnecessary for this non-sliding-window
application, and a simple binary-tree algorithm would require only 1
comparison per day on average.

Wikipedia has an RMQ solution using Cartesian trees achieving
constant-time queries with linear space, which I think is a result due
to Harel and Tarjan, which I don’t understand yet.  Cartesian trees
are binary trees obeying the min-heap property whose inorder traversal
returns the original sequence of elements.  Interestingly,
constructing the Cartesian tree uses almost precisely the algorithm
given above!  The stack is used to maintain the “rightmost spine” of
the Cartesian tree under construction.
