I keep thinking about the explanation in the Art of Electronics† of how
reading DRAM works.  Each column of the DRAM has a sense amplifier,
which is kind of like a differential amplifier — it’s actually a latch
consisting of two inverters in a loop.  Before reading, the loop is
shorted to force the inverters into a metastable state; then the short
is released and the appropriate row of capacitors is shorted to the
sense amplifiers.

This unbalances the previously metastable latches, which then fall
into one of their two stable states.  In the process, they charge the
capacitor all the way to the rail.

This is very similar to Merkle’s buckling-spring logic, in which a
gate begins in a stable state which is made metastable by the
application of a buckling force, which amplifies the balance of forces
applied to the spring into a large displacement driven by the buckling
force itself.  Merkle proposed using these as majority-rule gates with
a constant bias input to get AND and OR.

I wonder if such circuits could be a productive way to design digital
circuits even with current technology, integrating state and
combinational logic rather than keeping them separate.  As one simple
example, you could build a bidirectional shift register by using three
latches per bit, energizing only ⅓ to ⅔ of the latches at any given
time, passing the state along in the manner of a CCD or a Dekatron.
Or you could build an image memory that directly supports not only
shifting the image off the chip but also operations like dilation.

My hunch is that this approach ends up being more or less equivalent
to using master-slave flip-flops.

† “The sense amplifiers are latching devices, here drawn notionally as
fed-back noninverting amplifiers.  (In practice they are implemented
as flip-flops that begin the cycle in a balanced state and become
unbalanced by the bit-capacitor charge that is switched into
them. ... In a further dose of reality, things are a bit more
complicated: the sense amplifiers are *differential*, and the DRAM
array is usually built in a “folded-bit” arrangement so that any given
row line activates only the even or odd cells; the inactive (neutral)
bit line floats at the precharge level (Vdd/2) and acts as a reference
voltage by which the balanced sense amplifier compares the ΔV “bump”
up or down from the capacitor's charge in the respective bit
cell. ...”