I want a temperature-controlled water tank for food preparation,
including things like sous-vide cooking.  In particular, it would be
very valuable to me to be able to do the following:

1. Cook eggs in the shell without risk of overcooking them, boiling
   away all the water, exploding the eggs.

2. Heat water for mate to the appropriate mate temperature and
   maintain it there, rather than boiling water and then mixing it
   with an unknown amount of water.

3. Controlling the temperature of yogurt so that variations between
   different batches of yogurt, and different jars in the same batch,
   are not due to variations in the temperature curve.  This way I can
   experiment with different temperature curves.  It would be nice if,
   as a bonus, I can make larger batches of yogurt.

4. Cook plastic-wrap-wrapped vegetarian sausages at a known
   temperature without risk of burning the plastic (e.g., when
   steaming them in a pot there is the risk that the plastic comes in
   contact with the pot, which is at a higher temperature than the
   water, or that the water all boils away).

5. Rapidly defrost hermetically-sealed frozen food with a rapid flow
   of warm water.

There are also fun tricks like cooking part of an egg, or normal
sous-vide cooking of meat for long periods of time at low
temperatures, but I think of these as much less valuable.

I think this device needs one or more thermometers, a heating element
(maybe one of the cheap immersion heaters they sell at truck stops), a
relay (or SSR) to control the heating element, a microcontroller, and
some kind of water-circulating pump that can handle water at
temperature.  And, of course, a microcontroller with a well-tuned
thermal control system to prevent overshoot.

This is somewhat related to my desire for a dehydrator (see files
`nutra-circuits` and `home-dehumidifier`) for food preparation and
food waste handling, the main difference being the heat transport
medium — water in the case of the sous-vide cooker, air in the case of
the dehydrator.  The dehydrator would also probably need to measure
humidity.