Maybe this should be called a “disco ball display”.

If you scatter some sparkle sparsely on an uneven black plate and
illuminate it with a point source, each fleck of sparkle reflects a
beam off in some quasirandom direction.  If you rotate the wheel
around its axis, the beams from different flecks will scan in a
rotating pattern; if the light source is on the axis of the sparkle
wheel, the pattern is a cone, but I don’t think that’s the case in
general.

But I don’t care that much, because what I care about is what this
looks like from a single, somewhat arbitrary point of view, an eye.
It looks like sparkling, which is to say, brief pulses of light coming
from apparently random sources scattered around the disk.  If you
watch long enough without moving your eye, the sparkle pattern
repeats.  Most of the glitter flecks have scan patterns that miss the
eye entirely, but those that do not only illuminate it once.

If you map out the pattern of sparkling for a full rotation, you can
turn the light source on and off at chosen times to select which
flecks appear.  With this approach, you can generate a moving image
with a single LED, a glitter disk mounted to spin repeatably, and some
sort of apparatus for reliably positioning your eye.

Multiple flecks that are simultaneously visible are a problem.  If you
illuminate while they are visible, you add noise to the image; if you
do not, you have even lower efficiency.  So ideally the number of
flecks would be small enough that the average number of flecks
simultaneously visible is somewhere around 1.0.

In the limit of perfectly parallel light, perfectly flat and
infinitesimal flecks, and a perfectly infinitesimal viewing pupil,
this would not be a problem, because each fleck would be visible for
an infinitesimal period of time, so almost all would be at unique
times.  You could pulse the light source with a Dirac delta function
in order to fit nonzero light into this zero time, so you could still
see it.

But of course light sources have divergence, glitter flecks have size,
flecks are curved, and pupils have size.  Picking some numbers, a
laser pointer might have 1.2 milliradians of divergence and 2mm of
light source diameter, and might be mounted 2 meters from the spinning
plate; glitter flecks might be 200 microns in diameter and not have
significant curvature; and your eye might be “mounted” 1 meter from
the spinning plate and have a diameter of 4 mm.  Given these numbers,
it seems like the 4-milliradian pupil is almost certainly going to be
the limiting factor (and so you might as well use 4-millimeter or
8-millimeter flecks), but perhaps you could fix it by using a small
(less than 2 mm) peephole.

You should be able to get up to 4π milliradians of angular scanning
out of the apparatus, depending on the relative angles of the light,
your eye, the axis, and the flecks.  Unfortunately that still only
gives you about 3142 pixels at 4 milliradians, which is a shitty
display.  Illuminating only part of the plate doesn’t help; spinning
the plate faster doesn’t help; the issue is that you need each pixel
to get its own separate timeslot in the rotation, and the timeslots
are .004/(4π) of a full rotation.  Making your pupil smaller will
help, and if you can make different rotations different, that will
help too.

If you add more light sources, that will help a lot, because the
different light sources can activate different flecks simultaneously
with no interference.  Alternatively you could move the eye, the axis
of rotation of the plate, or the light sources, in a controlled
fashion, so that different rotations are different in a repeating
pattern.  So, for example, if you use an 8x8 array of light sources, a
2mm peephole, and rock the axis of rotation of the plate around at 4×
slower than the rotation of the plate, you might be able to get
3142·8·8·2·4 = 1.6 megapixels.  Now we’re talking!

If you rotate the plate at 5400 rpm (90 Hz) and revolve its axis of
rotation at one-fourth that, you get 22½ “frames” per second.

You might think that the contrast ratio between the glitter and the
black background will be a problem, but I think that you can enhance
that contrast ratio arbitrarily by getting further away — until the
beam from the glitter fleck is as wide as your pupil, at which point
you stop winning.

Then it’s just a matter of mapping out which light source illuminates
which spots on the disk at which position in the rotational cycle.

As displays go, this is grievously inefficient.  If your disc is 50mm
across and only the light falling on a 200-micron-square portion of it
is being used, and that only half the time, then 62499/62500 of the
light is lost.  But with a sufficiently bright light source, that
should be okay.

Using this approach backwards, you can recognize the fleck pattern of
a particular position with a camera in order to detect the rotational
position of the disc: a rotary encoder, potentially with three degrees
of freedom.