An integral of a square wave is a spline approximation of a sine wave.
The third integral is a cubic-spline approximation, which has very low
harmonic distortion.  The amplitude of the approximated sine wave is
the amplitude of the square wave scaled by the Nth power of the
period; for a third-order spline, it’s scaled by the cube of the
period.

This is interesting because the discrete analog of integral, running
sum, is linear, time-invariant, and very cheap indeed to compute (one
accumulator and one addition per sample), and sine waves are useful
primitives for composing many signals.

In the case of audio synthesis, in particular, I’m thinking you can
take some square waves (or envelope-shaped square waves), add them
together, and take their running sum a few times, to get a mix of
sinusoidal signals.

To be concrete, suppose you’re synthesizing 16ksps audio, and you want
to be able to cover the audible range down to 20Hz and up to the
Nyquist frequency at 8kHz.  A 20Hz square wave has a period of
16000/40 = 400 samples on both the top and bottom; this results in
amplifying the original square wave by about 400³ for a third-order
spline, or 64 million.  (This is not quite correct because of
discretization; the actual number is 10.6 to 10.7 million.)  This
means you need 32-bit integer math for your accumulators (and for the
amplitudes of your higher frequencies), but that 32-bit math gives you
a dynamic range at 20Hz of 10dB log₁₀((2³¹/10.6M)²) = 46dB, which is
quite respectable.

At higher frequencies, you have correspondingly more dynamic range; at
Nyquist, you have 31 bits of dynamic range, since the square wave *is*
the sine wave, or 187 dB.

So you have square waves, which are more or less cheap to compute (at
least as long as you’re far from Nyquist and can therefore disregard
jitter), and which you sum; and then you integrate them (three times)
to get a sum of (cubic) spline approximations of sine waves.  You have
to scale the amplitudes of the square waves as mentioned above,
proportional to the Nth power of the frequency.

