An apocalyptic religious cult has captured an area the size of Syria
in an effort to bring about the end of the world.  It conducts mass
executions of “apostates” about once a month, and enslaves many of the
people it conquers.  This year, it says, the Mahdi will appear; he
will lead them to victory against Rome’s crusader armies in Dabiq.  

The United States routinely uses tele-operated flying military robots
to incinerate people suspected of opposing it in areas far from any
battlefield.  A repentant US robot operator has just gone public with
his story after personally killing some 1600 people, many of them
innocent.  A repentant CIA agent has just been released from prison,
where he was serving a sentence for blowing the whistle on the CIA’s
illegal torture program.  No other participants in the torture program
have yet been charged with crimes by a court.

A resurgent undemocratic Russia has just revealed that, for the last
fourteen years, rogue intelligence agents in the United States has
been inserting undetected spying software into computers around the
globe, including reprogramming the controllers in their hard disk
drives.

A year and a half ago, a soft-spoken ex-CIA employee fled the US,
first to Hong Kong and then to Russia, having released a massive
collection of classified documents showing the extent of the US’s
illegal spying programs at home and abroad.  He is still in hiding in
Russia.  Among other things, he showed that US spies had broken into
all of the data centers of many US technology companies and stolen
their customers’ information.  Now, US tech companies are in open
conflict with the intelligence agencies.  Many of them are redesigning
their products and systems to frustrate intelligence agencies.

At about the same time, the founder of Russia’s biggest online social
networking system, through which hundreds of millions of users
maintain contact with their friends, fled to the US after legal
harassment by the Russian government.  Today he is working on an
encrypted messaging system.

Meanwhile, in a room in the Ecuadorean embassy in London, there lives
an Australian hacker and award-winning journalist whose hair went
white in his thirties.  He has not left the embassy for years.  The
Ecuadorean government granted him political asylum three years ago
when the British government sought to extradite him to Sweden, from
which he claims he would be extradited to the US.  A secret US grand
jury investigation of his journalism started years ago, after it
published a large collection of classified US embassy cables which
have been a crucial source for journalists and scholars of
international relations ever since.

The political assassination of nearly the entire staff of a satirical
weekly newspaper in France has resulted in a wave of anti-Muslim
violence throughout the country and new restrictions on speech and
freedom of association throughout the continent.

In Argentina, where the currency is collapsing, the president has just
been indicted by a state’s attorney for covering up an Iranian
terrorist attack on a Jewish building.  The previous state’s attorney
was found dead in his apartment the day before he was to present the
charges against her.

The Pope and the president of Russia both announced last year that the
Third World War had begun.

A volatile, pseudonymous virtual currency built on cryptography,
implemented by software written by a mysterious figure known only by
the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto, has a US$3 billion market
capitalization (down from US$17 billion) and half a billion dollars a
month in trading volume.  Many countries have outlawed it.  Custom
chips designed only to process this virtual currency now populate
multi-megawatt data centers throughout the world.

Meanwhile, prominent technologists warn that artificial intelligence
is likely to end the human race, and that automation will destroy most
jobs even sooner.

US citizens seeking solace in traditional belief systems have begun to
shun vaccination, and diseases such as measles that were eradicated
generations ago have begun to return to the nation.  Polio begins to
spread internationally in areas afflicted by armed insurrection,
especially Pakistan, where many polio vaccination workers have been
killed since the US hunted down jihadist leader Osama bin Laden in
2011 using a fake vaccination program.

A US movie studio shut down a couple of months ago for a period of
time and pulled a satirical movie about North Korea after all its
internal emails were stolen and released.  The US government blames
the attack on North Korea, but an anonymous group of bored teenagers
seems more likely.

A worldwide conspiracy of anonymous bored teenagers known as Anonymous
has been temporarily politically neutralized by, primarily, US law
enforcement, after they began to uncover and publish information about
illegal conspiracies within large US companies.  The US has one
journalist imprisoned for attempting to report on the group.  A
splinter group numbering a few hundred thousand has been honing
harassment tactics against US feminists, particularly those who
criticize video games.

Uruguay, Colorado, Washington, Alaska, Oregon, and Washington, DC
legalize recreational marijuana.  Belgium legalizes euthanasia for the
terminally ill, and the Queen of Belgium, who has been sick for years,
dies.

A year ago, Ukraine exploded in protests that overthrow its
pro-Russian government; Russia annexes part of Ukraine.  US elites are
debating the merits of arming Ukraine.  Ukrainian nationalists are
using hand-launched artisanal flying robots made in Dnepropetrovsk to
surveil pro-Russian forces from the air, but not yet to kill them.
Ukrainian children collect fresh remnants of artillery shells.

Switzerland unpegs the Swiss franc from the Euro, immediately
bankrupting several major foreign-exchange brokerage firms who had
offered their customers extreme leverage with which to speculate.

Greece, suffering a worse economic downturn than the Great Depression,
elects a party that claims to be a coalition of the radical left,
which immediately begins to reverse privatization and government
downsizing, and plan to shut down the concentration camps into which
the previous government had herded asylum seekers.  The new government
hires a video game company’s Economist-In-Residence as its finance
minister, and the continent is full of speculation that Greece will
withdraw from the Euro.  Greek banks seem to be collapsing as a
result.

Australia, by contrast, continues to herd asylum seekers into
concentration camps, where they are imprisoned for the rest of their
lives for the crime of not being Australian.

The US continues to lead the world in imprisoning its own citizens
with 1% of its adults in prison, rivaling the Stalin-era USSR on a
per-capita basis, and remains the only country in the Americas to
execute them.  Although it continues not to publish any official
statistics on the matter, its police continue to extrajudicially
execute several times as many US citizens (Wikipedia counts 593 cases
in 2014) as are executed legally (Wikipedia counts 39 cases in 2013),
a practice that has provoked widespread protests for the last several
months, centering around the execution of an unarmed teenager in
Ferguson, Missouri.  China, however, leads the world in executions,
executing thousands of people per year, more than the rest of the
world combined.

Amidst all of this, the total installed volume of photovoltaic panels
(almost entirely made in China, which is now the world’s biggest
economy) is increasing by 30% per year, and oil prices have fallen by
more than half to their lowest price in years, plunging Venezuela into
a serious economic crisis and putting economic pressure on Russia.
After adopting controversial new mining techniques that cause frequent
earthquakes in previously seismically stable areas, the US has
returned its oil production to their peak levels in the 1970s, and now
its oil production is exceeded only by Saudi Arabia and Russia.

Meanwhile, atmospheric CO₂ has shot past 400 ppm, higher than it has
been in 4.5 million years, 120 ppm higher than before the Industrial
Revolution, due to burning fossil fuels.  As a consequence, 2014 was
the hottest year in recorded history; NASA reports that the
southwestern US is almost certain to face “megadroughts” lasting
decades, droughts unmatched in a millennium.

This is the political landscape of the early 20th century.

A quarter of the world’s population has Linux-based personal computers
in their pockets, running at microwave frequencies and always
wirelessly connected to the internet.  This number doubles every year.
These computers are not secure, and their users do not have root, so
they can be used to spy on the users without their knowledge.  The US
commonly does this to target people for assassination by flying robot.

We have a free encyclopedia universally available to anyone on the
internet, and that anyone can edit.  It continues to grow linearly,
reaching almost 5 billion articles, the equivalent of about 2000
volumes.  Against all odds, it continues to remain more reliable than
any previously written encyclopedia.  Encyclopedia Britannica has
ceased print publication.  Many newspapers have also ceased
publication.

All new luxury cars now come with onboard supercomputers that record
GPS traces of their travels.  This data is sent back to the
manufacturer to analyze.
