Reading the 1962 book about Stretch.  There are a lot of strange ideas
and terminology in here.

“Edit” seems to be used in a sense I don’t understand.

IBM, especially at that time, had a habit of plagiarizing other
people’s ideas, so it’s hard to tell what’s really new here; but
Stretch was the first IBM computer, at least, to be pipelined, though
this was called “virtual memory,” predating the use of that term to
mean swapping to disk.

The idea of a “program” solving a “problem” for a “sponsor” is pretty
far from our current understanding.  So, too, the justification of
“multiprogramming” (also “time-sharing”): “it becomes economically
practical for a person seated at a console to observe his program
during execution and interrupt it while considering the next step”,
and also to “avoid delaying the calculator [!] for input-output”.

The disk storage (intended for 250,000 words per second, though only
half of that was achieved: 8 megabits per second, seek time 150 ms;
the terms “DASD” and “fixed disk” do not appear) was considered to
avoid the need for “very-high-speed magnetic tapes.”

“On line” and “off line” also appear, in quotes, to describe different
ways of entering input data: on directly connected devices, or using
physically separate devices that produced magnetic tapes, “the fastest
possible medium”.

“To an increasing extent, bits in even a scientific computer represent
things other than numerical quantities: elements of a program
metalanguage, alphabetic material, representations of graphs...”

A rather striking feature is that Stretch’s memory, in 1961, had a
2.1-μs cycle time, which they considered rather slow (thus its 64-bit
word size).  Nowadays the main memory of my laptop (whose CPU uses a
64-bit word size) can produce bursts substantially faster than this,
at close to 1 ns, but random accesses still cost it nearly 100 ns,
which is only 21× faster.

Stretch could address 2¹⁸ words, but the first 32 words were its
registers; I imagine this wasn’t useful to user programs because of
the memory-protection scheme explained below.  Register 0 was the zero
register, “a bottomless pit.”

Memory protection was provided as follows: “The interpretation and
execution of instructions is monitored to make sure that the effective
addresses are within boundaries defined by two [address-]boundary
registers.”

Only floating-point math was bit-parallel; logical operations and
fixed-point arithmetic were done by “the serial section” of “the
arithmetic unit”, which was not yet called the ALU (though
“Instructions that combine bits by logical and, or, and exclusive or
functions have been available in earlier computers.”).  This had the
advantage that the operands didn’t have to be word-aligned, or even
byte-aligned, but could instead be at arbitrary bit offsets.
“Byte-aligned” wouldn’t have made any sense anyway — “The number of
bits used to encode individual characters may be varied.  Thus a
decimal digit may be compactly represented by a binary code of 4 bits,
or it may be expanded to 6 or more bits when intermixed with
alphabetic information.”

It still had only a single accumulator (and 15 index registers) but
the accumulator was two words, which I think means 128 bits!  This
despite extensive handwringing about how hard they worked to wring the
most out of their slow memory (this was the reason for the pipelining,
which prefetched).

The index registers were 64 bits wide even though memory addresses
were only 24 bits (“A complete word-and-bit address forms a 24-bit
number.”).  So they used the extra bits to count loop iterations and
specify a “refill address” for reloading the register, and there’s a
“progressive indexing” mode “in which the index quantities may be
advanced each time they are used”.

Its indirect addressing mode was wild: “The term *indirect address*
refers to an address that gives the location of another address. An
indirect address may select an immediate address, a direct address, or
yet another indirect address. Indirect addresses are obtained in the
7030 by the instruction LOAD VALUE EFFECTIVE, which places the
effective address found at the specified memory location into an index
register for indexing a subsequent instruction. Multiple-level
indirect addressing is obtained when LOAD VALUE EFFECTIVE finds at the
selected location another instruction LOAD VALUE EFFECTIVE which
causes the indirect addressing process to be repeated.”

The interrupt vector table was called “a table of fix-up
instructions”.

When talking about data formats for address arithmetic, the data
formats shown are actually instruction word formats, suggesting that
despite the ample index registers on the machine, self-modifying code
was common.

One of the strange uses of “edit”: “For example, a floating-point
datum may be developed as a unit in a computation, its components then
used in radix-conversion arithmetic, and the characters of the result
finally used as units in editing for printing.”  I think maybe “edit”
means “format” (although the Fortran statement is FORMAT, not EDIT.)

Aha, there’s a definition: “A final class, _editing operations_,
includes all operations in which data are transformed from one format
to another, checked for consistency with a source format, or tested
for controlling the course of the program.”  So “editing” includes
comparisons for control flow!