The CandyFab did 3-D printing in sugar by blowing hot air onto the
sugar to melt it, a process that requires delicate temperature control
to avoid caramelizing the sugar all the way to carbon foam.

But carbon foam is in some ways a more useful material than sugar.  It
has a much higher strength-to-weight ratio, it's vastly more
heat-resistant, it's less dense, and often it can be prepared as a
conductor or an insulator depending on processing temperature.

In addition to hot air, you can also convert sugar to carbon foam by
dripping or squirting concentrated sulfuric acid on it, every
high-school chemistry teacher's favorite scary chemical reaction.  In
a powder-bed 3-D printing process like that used by the CandyFab, this
permits you to selectively deposit carbon foam in a sugar powder bed.
This could be useful for a couple of different reasons: first, you
might have fillers that are sensitive to the heat needed to melt
sugar, but not to sulfuric acid, perhaps styrofoam beads or something
similar; and, second, you might be able to inject the sulfuric acid
more precisely or more quickly than you can inject the heat.  In file
`needle-binder-injection-printing` I outlined a variant of this
process that would work well with sulfuric acid as the "binder" being
injected deep within the powder bed.

A third possibility is injecting a susceptor, then "baking" the whole
powder bed with microwaves or with a dielectric heater; for example,
vegetable oil should be a sufficient susceptor to dehydrate sugar in a
domestic microwave oven, but other candidates include silicon carbide,
graphite, and magnetite.  These should work with other kinds of
powder-bed processes that require post-heating as well, like those
described in file `flux-deposition`, enabling more rapid heating of
large powder-bed-embedded objects than can be achieved by heat
conduction alone.

Possible fillers for this process are highly varied, and they can be
selectively deposited in the powder bed, as fluxing agents are in the
process described in file `flux-deposition`.  The simplest is
powdered, sieved coke, which will simply produce a denser carbon foam
and costs US$0.70/kg, according to file `powder-bed-3d-printing`.  The
cheapest is silica sand for construction, US$0.012/kg; carbon foam
ought to stick well enough to that.  An alternative to sugar that
similarly foams up by dehydration, and sticks fabulously to silica, is
dried sodium silicate (waterglass), US$1.10/kg.  Copper or brass
(US$4/kg) could form conductive traces; steel wool or glass fiber
(US$6/kg) could provide tensile strength.

Sugar, being water-soluble, can also be used as a binder simply by
squirting a bit of water onto it; but it will virtually never dry out
by itself at room temperature --- you'd have to bake it.

(A quick stovetop experiment shows that granulated table sugar, when
heated to dehydration, is able to bind construction sand together at
about 25% sugar, but not at about 10% sugar.  Presumably this depends
not only on the quantities of sugar and sand but also their grain size
distributions.  Even at 25% sugar, the mass is quite crumbly; it
disintegrates with a touch.  50% sugar is quite a bit more solid.)
