I’d planned to do laundry at a friend’s house today (since she
has a washing machine and I don’t), and to write some code for
the $work project.  First, I went out to find the hours for
Teatro Ciego, petting a small spotted dog locked up in a
neighborhood store on the way home, and then at home I began
to write about a friend’s idea.

Much to my surprise, the doorbell rang; a French sculptor I
hadn’t seen in maybe a year had dropped by unannounced, and so
we went to sit nearby to meet a tall lesbian musician from
Darmstadt.  Neighborhood kids were playing dodgeball noisily
against the metal shutters closing a storefront, so we sat
elsewhere and caught up on our respective lives.

The musician arrived, irritated at having taken the wrong bus,
and we walked around the neighborhood, buying empanadas on the
way to the park.  I introduced her to capresse empanadas, and
she told me about her pessimism about Bitcoin and Wikipedia,
based in part on the history of radio, in a mix of Portuguese
and Spanish.  Later, in my apartment, sweating from the summer
heat, the three of us sipped green tea from atop a styrofoam
cooler chest wrapped in cellophane tape.

Perhaps too late in the day, I texted my friend about the
laundry.  I never got a reply.

The three of us went to a bar where the musician would perform
later.  I ate a cold raw pickled eggplant burrito, which
wasn’t quite nauseating, as plump and tattooed young
Argentines played rock to thunderous applause, despite their
inability to sing in tune.  Crammed between walls hung with
psychedelic surrealist paintings, the crowd demanded an
out-of-tune encore.  A disheveled woman in a plaid shirt
fanned herself and, inadvertently, me, with a folding fan, as
I drank a Speed Unlimited energy drink — like a Red Bull with
less vitamins.

The musician got up to play.  She sounded like Janis Joplin,
and is by far the most skilled musician I’ve ever heard
perform in this bar.  Instability in the power supplies for
their green LEDs gave rise to a distracting yellow flicker in
the spotlight.

A bespectacled young man with a mustache at the table in front
of me, wearing the only button-down shirt in the bar, took his
Android phone out of his satchel to check the time.

A tattooed young couple gazed into each other’s eyes across a
table nearby, stroking one another’s hands before leaning
slowly across the table for a quick, perfunctory kiss before
parting.

Walking home, I pass a small boy in a baseball cap picking
through the garbage, and then a middle-aged grandmother with
her daughter and baby granddaughter doing the same.  On a
busier street, a young woman showed necklaces laid out on a
blanket to a mother with covered hair and her two
yarmulke-clad boys.

