It occurred to me that you could maybe produce random deep-sounding or
epic-sounding surrealist things with a dictionary substitution, which
is to say a code, applied to ordinary English sentences, respecting
the same parts of speech.  For example, take this ordinary sentence by
Thomas Ptacek:

> If I were in charge of Russia, I would not want to get caught hacking
> the US.

Tag it by parts of speech and inflection:

> If(conj) I(pron) were(v, 1st person singular subjunctive) in(conj)
> charge(n, plural or mass) of(prep) Russia(proper noun), I(pron)
> would(modal v taking infinitive) not(adv) want(v, inf) to(prep)
> get(aux v taking past participle) caught(v, past participle)
> hacking(v, present participle) the(article) US(noun).

Now, likely, you can make a substitution of other words that are the
same part of speech while leaving it nearly grammatical.  Some of the
words — the ones in closed classes like conjunctions, prepositions,
and modal verbs, and the ones that determine the inflection of other
verbs — might be best to leave unchanged.  For the ones you
substitute, you could have a boring choice:

> If I occurred in things of English, I could maybe take to have
> tagged making a sentence.

But maybe if you pick words with great emotional resonance instead,
you could end up with something that sounds poetic, surrealist, or
deep instead:

> If I exalted in stone of suffering, I should deeply have danced
> flying the blood.

There are lists of “emotionally powerful words”, “trigger words”,
“power words”, or “high emotion words” going around for two-bit
hustlers to spice up their sales pitches with.  If I pick some words
at random from one of these lists, I get this instead:

> If I banned in insiders of Eva, I would stoically get satisfied
> controlling the miracle.

Another one quotes Churchill approvingly, “We have before us an ordeal
of a most grievous kind.”  If I use the uncommon words from the
Churchill quote, I get this:

> If I struggled in ordeals of God, I would not wage to get surpassed
> suffering the tyranny.

The list of “317 power words” underneath gives results that are not as
evocative, perhaps because the author is a two-bit clickbait hustler
and not Winston Churchill, producing this instead:

> If I collapsed in meltdowns of IRS, I would not worry to get
> cautioned smashing the mistake.

If I instead pick an arbitrary page of the Silmarillion for my words,
I get this:

> If I lay in lands of Beleg, I would not stay to get spoken asking
> the tree.
