Here I'm going to try to write down some of my predictions for future
technological development, so that I can check them later.  I'm
assigning things I'm more sure about a higher "certainty level or 'CL'", which
I'm thinking will be in a range of 0-9.

Inspired by
<http://kk.org/ct2/2008/04/digital-things-ive-been-wrong.php>.


2008-04-19
----------

Second Life (or equivalent): going to be the basis of a lot of
socialization in 10 years, if they can make it decentralized (CL 2);
primarily among groups of people who know each other in real life, but
aren't physically co-located at the moment (CL 2).

Spore: going to be a huge seller (CL 3) and even bigger influence on
newly designed games (CL 4) (and maybe other programs (CL 2)) over the
next 5 years.

Automated fabrication (one-off production of goods without direct
human intervention): starting around 2010 and by 2013, it's going to
replace more than 5% of traditional manufacturing, measured by value
(CL 4).  Price-sensitive goods will continue to be made by traditional
manufacturing unless and until automated fabrication gets cheaper than
traditional manufacturing plus transportation (CL 5), which I don't
think will happen in 5 years and probably not in 10 (CL 3).

Version control: in five years, the mainstream version control systems
will include SVN (CL 5), Git (CL 5), and Mercurial (CL 4), but not
Darcs (CL 3), Bazaar (CL 3), any other arch variant (CL 4), CVS (CL
2), or Perforce (CL 4).  They already don't include RCS, PVCS, SCCS,
CSSC, Aegis, Vesta, or BitKeeper.  There will be important new
alternatives that I haven't heard of yet (CL 4) but none of them will
be as popular as Git (CL 4).  A lot of things that aren't
traditionally considered source code will be stored in these version
control systems, like textual documents.

Perl 5 will still be in wider use than Perl 6 five years from now (CL
2), but neither will be in as wide use as Ruby or Python (CL 3).

DiSo will have a lot of users in 5 years (CL 1) but still won't be as
popular as Facebook (CL 3) or MSN Messenger (CL 5) and won't be as
popular as some social networking system I haven't heard of yet (CL
3).

General-purpose consumer microcomputers that are popular in the EU
will cost between one and four barrels of light sweet crude (CL 3),
and computers at that price will still execute single-threaded code at
under 5 billion basic blocks per second (CL 5).  Today's equivalents
(which cost a bit more) can typically do about 8 threads at full
speed; five years of Moore's law would make that 32, but I think that
computers at that price five years from now are likely to be able to
run at least 128 threads at this 5G-basic-blocks-per-second speed (CL
4).  Multithreading will provide a decisive performance advantage to
software written in a variety of ways that aren't currently
mainstream, such as Erlang's model, Verilog, and array-processing
languages (CL 3), rather than providing an equally large performance
boost to software written with shared-everything threads and locks, as
Herb Sutter predicted.  High-performance software being written in
this way, combined with a lot of experience with server
virtualization, will create an opportunity for new CPU architectures
that don't directly support x86, ARM, or MIPS instruction sets ---
whether a relatively traditional design like the Tera MTA or something
wild like FPGAs, the SeaForth, tagged dataflow machines, or concurrent
linear graph reduction machines --- so at least one such architecture
will have total market sales 1% or more of the x86-compatibles' market
sales (CL 3).

In five years, devices like cell phones, portable computers with
embedded radios in which the user does not have ultimate control over
the software, will be the way that most people access the internet
most of the time (CL 5; this is already true except that most people
don't access the internet yet) and will sell ten times as many units
per year as the traditional kind of computer in which the user is
ultimately responsible (CL 3).

In five years, electoral campaign success in the US at every level
except presidential campaigns will be largely determined by word of
"mouth" (using electronic communications whose receivers solicit them,
rather than paid advertisements) rather than paid advertisements (CL
3).  Presidential campaigns will be too (CL 2).  In ten years, both of
these will be true (CL 4).

In five years, intellectual property restrictions, not terrorism,
other aspects of human rights, or agriculture, will be the most
controversial issue in international negotiations.  (CL 2)

I don't know what to predict about peer-to-peer systems like Vipul's
Razor and BitTorrent.  I suppose that they will continue to exist, and
the kind of people who thought jazz and tango music were scandalous
will continue to oppose them (CL 6).  And fragile centralized systems
like DNS and Google will continue to exist too (CL 6).  Whether the
mix will change, and how it will affect society, I have no idea.

In the last few years, there have been several hobbyist UAVs and other
robots for remote sensing, of which Art van den Berg's glider is
probably the most impressive.  In the next five years, there will be
more of them (CL 5) and some of them will be even more impressive than
van den Berg's project (CL 2).  Governments will worry and some will
make new laws restricting model aircraft (CL 4).  Some people will
commercialize the technology (CL 3), use it to advance the state of
knowledge in some scientific field (CL 3), or do things with it that
benefit s lot of people (CL 3).  Possible applications include
inexpensive high-quality aerial remote sensing, deep-sea exploration,
substituting for radio towers and communication satellites, and rapid,
inexpensive delivery of small, light items, especially to inaccessible
places.

Five years from now, solar energy will be a cost-effective source of
electricity in countries that currently derive much of their
electrical energy from natural gas or oil (CL 5), because the prices
of those commodities will have risen (CL 6).  I mean to say that it
will be cheaper than those fossil fuels without any government
subsidies.  It will probably be cost-effective in countries like the
US which get most of their electricity from coal (CL 4), because
people will figure out how to bring the cost of solar electric systems
down and their efficiency up (CL 4).

Five years from now, other renewable sources of electricity will be
cost-effective, too (CL 4).  Maybe wind, geothermal, old-oil-well
geothermal, tidal, wave power, or even biomass.

Five years from now, digital cameras will surveil all urban public
places in the OECD countries (CL 4), probably because random
individual people will carry digital cameras around with them and
always turned on (CL 3), not just because of cameras placed
permanently by the owners of those spaces.

Five years from now, despite the rising prices of fossil fuels (see
above, CL 6) long-distance transport will remain affordable for most
of the world's food (CL 6), so "locavorism" will not become an
economic imperative (CL 6).

Five years from now, China will have experienced at least one
recession (two consecutive quarters of negative economic growth) (CL
3), as some aspect or other of its current strategy falters.

Within five years, extrajudicial executions of innocent citizens by
the police in both the US and Britain will have provoked considerable
furor (CL 3), but the general public in both countries will be in
favor of such policies (CL 5).

Within five years, the most-widely-consulted cartographic resource
will be a community project like Wikipedia (CL 4), and OpenStreetMap
will be the most-widely-consulted community cartographic resource (CL
4).  Most important scientific papers in hard-science fields will be
published first in open-access media such as arXiv, open-access
institutional repositories, or open-access journals (CL 4).  The same
thing will be true of most important academic papers in less
scientific disciplines such as history, psychology, and sociology (CL
2).  Significant non-open-access journals will still exist, even in
hard-science fields, and will still publish some important new results
(CL 5).

Five years from now, most people who enter text into computers will
still use QWERTY keyboards or phone keypads (CL 4), not Morse code,
Dvorak, speech recognition, or something else exotic.

DHTML will still be a widely-used format for new applications five
years from now (CL 4) and will not have been eclipsed in popularity by
one of the various new alternatives that are being marketed now (CL 3)
such as Silverlight and Flash.

Over the next five years, computer and network security will be a
bigger and bigger problem (CL 5) as organized crime makes more and
more use of computer security vulnerabilities to get money and power
(CL 4).

Five years from now, illegally copied software will still be
ubiquitous, even in OECD countries, on computers that are controlled
by their users (CL 5).

I'm not sure what's going to happen with agriculture.  There are
clearly better ways to go about it than the Green Revolution
approaches, especially in marginal areas like New Mexico, Iraq, much
of Jordan and the West Bank, the llanos of eastern Colombia, and so
on.  Whether those approaches will catch on, who can say?

Five years from now, there will be at least one change that is as
important as anything I've mentioned here, but that didn't occur to me
(CL 3).

Five years from now, Communist China still will not have produced any
proprietary software that is widely used in the rest of the world,
except software bundled with hardware, (CL 4) and probably no large
piece of widely-used free software either (CL 3).

Five years from now, quantum computers will not be a practical
alternative to conventional computers for general tasks (CL 6), nor
will they be in ten years (CL 5), but in five years we'll see them do
some impressive things (CL 3).  (It's possible that they will instead
fail to work; if that happens, it will reveal a fundamental weakness
in our understanding of quantum physics (CL 4).)  Ten years from now,
they will do some practically useful things (CL 2).



