I was thinking about making a tiny Python-like language, called
Threadsnake or Thredsnek for the time being.  The idea is to implement
as much as possible in, say, 1.5KiB or 3KiB or 6KiB of code.

I think the most important linguistic reasons current Python is so
effective are the following:

1. The memory model is the Lisp-style object-graph, a
   garbage-collected heap.
2. A small number of general-purpose, flexible-sized data structures
   (containers): specifically hash tables (“dicts”) and dynamic arrays
   (“lists”).  Pervasive mutability is key to Python’s current flavor,
   but it clashes with the object-graph memory model in a lot of ways,
   so I think we could probably drop it.  (Python also has tuples,
   sets, frozensets, namedtuples, deques, Counters, OrderedDicts, and
   defaultdicts, but these are less necessary.)
3. “Duck typing”: interactions between objects are indirected through
   interfaces, and so it generally doesn’t matter what concrete type
   an object is, just what interfaces or protocols it supports.  So,
   for example, keys in the built-in hash tables need not be strings;
   they can be any object that supports the `__hash__` and `__eq__`
   methods.  (The original term for this was “object orientation”,
   “message passing”, or “late binding”, but people got confused about
   what those terms meant; “duck typing” is the current term.)  In
   particular, any code can define its own “types” which are really
   just wrappers that provide a duck-typed façade to dicts.
4. As a special case, iteration indirects through an “iterator
   protocol” which allows for composable iterators, and there is a
   coroutine facility for this (“generators”) which can be put to many
   different uses.  (I am sympathetic to Alexandrescu’s argument that
   maybe we should use a “range protocol” instead of an iterator
   protocol for this.)
5. Errors are handled with exceptions.  Ambiguity and implicitness is
   an error; there is very little DWIM.  (Implicit variable
   declaration is an exception to this, and was probably a mistake.)
   Consequently, if your program runs and produces an answer instead
   of crashing, you can have a fair bit of confidence that the answer
   is correct.
6. Reflection allows the in-language implementation of debugging
   facilities and transparent and semitransparent persistence
   facilities like ORMs.
7. Tasteful and largish standard library (“batteries included”).  It’s
   very easy to, for example, run unit tests, split strings on
   whitespace, join together many strings with a separator (such as a
   space), concatenate strings, do formatted string interpolation, do
   integer and floating-point arithmetic, read a line from a file,
   read an entire file into memory, parse RFC-822 syntax, parse or
   emit JSON or XML or CSV, do a substring search, extract a substring
   by indices, lowercase a string, remove leading and/or trailing
   whitespace from strings, display an unambiguous debugging
   representation of Python objects in HTML or in text, run binary
   search, round a number to a given number of decimals, search
   strings for regular expressions, collate the number of occurrences
   of each item in an iterable sequence and return the top items, sort
   and reverse lists, encode and decode UTF-8 and other common
   character encodings, and so on.

This is not as poetic as Tim Peters’s _The Zen of Python_, but I think
it might be more helpful.

Duck typing in particular means that all your data structures (heaps,
sorted lists, whatever) and algorithms (sort algorithms, graph
algorithms, whatever) are automatically polymorphic over whatever
types are available, and that you can substitute persistent containers
(in the disk sense) for nonpersistent ones transparently.

Python has some major shortcomings.  The semantics of its procedure
and class definitions make live code upgrade impossible; its
efficiency in general is terrible; its semantics are so flexible that
many errors cannot be caught until runtime even in principle; its
absence of first-class lambdas or Smalltalk-style blocks has given
rise to a steadily growing pile of kludges such as method decorators
and context managers.  But it remains immensely popular and immensely
practical.

And this is in spite of its lack of many things commonly considered
critically important in a programming language: encapsulation,
structs, nested scoping (at least in old versions), a decent GUI
library...

It's clearly impossible to implement a sizable standard library in a
few K of code.  But how much code would Thredsnek need to implement
garbage collection, dicts and lists, duck typing (including for
iteration), exceptions, and reflection?  On modern machines, it would
still be useful even with fairly inefficient approaches to these
problems.

What kind of abstract machine would be needed to implement this?  You
need to be able to send messages (invoke methods), store and retrieve
local variables (including parameters), retrieve constants, raise and
catch exceptions, instantiate objects (including dicts and lists;
possibly by sending messages to a class), and do reflection (possibly
by sending messages to some kind of reflection object, which seems
preferable to invoking magic non-implementable reflection messages on
arbitrary objects).  You probably also need control-flow and
method-return operations.

For variable-length argument lists, like those used for instantiating
lists or dictionaries, it might be useful to begin by pushing a stack
mark and pass everything down to that mark as arguments.

As a point of reference, the Smalltalk-78 virtual machine for the
NoteTaker was supposedly 6KiB of 8086 machine code.  This used the
Smalltalk-76 bytecode, which was simpler than the Smalltalk-80;
according to Ingalls's 1978 paper on it, its high nibble selected the
overall category of operation:

* 0x1x: load an instance field (implicitly limited to 16);
* 0x2x: load a local variable;
* 0x3x: load from the table of constants for this method;
* 0x4x: load *indirectly* from the table of constants (I think this
  was used for accessing classes and other global variables);
* 0x5x: load from a Context field (I don’t understand this);
* 0x6x: load one of the universally common constants, -1, 0, 1, 2, 10,
  true, false, and nil;
* 0x7x: sends a message to the Context, but I don’t know what for;
* 0x8x: sends one of SpecialMessages, which I assume are things like
  `+` and `=`;
* 0x90–0x97: jump forward up to 8 bytecodes unconditionally;
* 0x98–0x9f: jump forward up to 8 bytecodes if false;
* 0xa0 0xxx – 0xa7 0xxx: jump unconditionally up to 768 bytes back or
  2047 forward;
* 0xa8 0xxx – 0xaf 0xxx: jump conditionally (by the same amount);
* 0xb0: discard stack top;
* 0xb1 0xxx: copy stack top into given location;
* 0xb2 0xxx: move stack top into given location (and pop it);
* 0xb3: return stack top as method return value.

The bytes denoting locations to store into were the same as the load
opcodes.
