Time-domain radio, aka ultrawideband or pulse radio, is mostly
considered in the context of very-low-power communication.  But
there's an interesting very-high-power physical phenomenon that could
be useful for time-domain radio: lightning.  The mechanism that
triggers lightning is not well understood; when it happens, the
electric field is still two orders of magnitude below the voltage
needed to ionize homogeneous air.  Then, the current jumps from
effectively zero to some tens of kA within a few microseconds, with a
conductor length of typically a few kilometers.  This transmits a
powerful electromagnetic impulse horizontally across the bands up to a
few hundred kHz, an impulse powerful enough to be detected at
considerable distance.  If we figure on an antenna impedance of 63
ohms, 30 kA will generate a radio pulse of about 60 gigawatts.

How far away can you detect a 60-gigawatt pulse from?  If we assume a
detection threshold of -70dBm, which works fine in Wi-Fi cards, and a
ten-square-meter dish antenna, you can detect a signal down to
10⁻¹¹ W/m², so you hit that threshold when the power is spread out
over 6×10²¹ m², which is when the pulse has expanded into a sphere
22 billion meters in radius.  This is about a sixth of the distance
from the Earth to the Sun.  If you can detect down to -85dBm, you can
apparently detect the lightning strike from just about anywhere in the
inner solar system.

So it seems safe to speculate that you should be able to detect a
lightning strike using shortwave radio from anywhere on Earth, and
using other radio bands, perhaps from some of the other inner planets
too.  It really seems like overkill for terrestrial communication.

You still can't make lightning from scratch, but you can trigger it.
The traditional approach is to blaspheme, but that has been shown both
experimentally and theoretically to have very low efficacy;
additionally, the large amount of time required to blaspheme (hundreds
of milliseconds or more) would dramatically limit your possible
communications bandwidth.  More modern approaches, shown to work
fairly reliably, include firing rockets into clouds trailing wire from
spools, and ionizing paths in air using ultraviolet lasers.
Presumably particle accelerators can also ionize paths in air.  (I've
seen speculation that cosmic-ray strikes play a role in creating
lightning leaders.)

A problem with laser-induced ionization is that ionized air is opaque,
so it tends to be self-limiting; nevertheless, some experiments have
found success using this method.

Particle accelerators might work better; particle beams are attenuated
by air, but no more by plasma than by regular air, less so even.  And
you could maybe use the particle accelerator to produce a beam of
synchrotron radiation or X-rays to form the ionized path, rather than
firing subluminal particle beams into the air.  Alternatively you
could perhaps use an X-ray laser.

You probably can't find a place where you can trigger lightning more
often than a few times a month, and you can probably only control the
triggering to a precision of a microsecond or so within a window of a
few seconds, so your total system bandwidth isn't going to be more
than a few dozen bits per month.

This approach to radio communication has the advantage that you could
transmit data over interplanetary distances without being detectable
as a radio source without access to the spreading code.