Concurrent actors in a microcontroller
--------------------------------------

Suppose you have a microcontroller with a small RAM (say, 2kiB) and you
want to run bigger actor-oriented programs.  Perhaps you can "page"
the actors in and out to an external serial memory?

What I have in mind is that you can have many messages in flight at
the same time --- enqueued in the RAM --- and some subset of actors
resident.  Whenever an actor sends a message to another actor, the
message is enqueued, and the execution engine merely repeatedly
searches for a message to deliver to a resident actor.  When there are
no more such messages, it "pages out" some actors to the serial memory
to make space to "page in" some other actor that has messages waiting
for it.

It's possible for the set of in-flight messages to get too big for
RAM.  There are a couple of tactics we could use in this case.

First, we could simply page out a chunk of the message queue to the
serial memory.  This will universally work, but it might make it hard
to figure out what actors would be good choices to page in later.

Second, we could look for message deliveries that will diminish the
number of in-flight messages instead of increasing it.  In the
classical Actors model and in Erlang, each handling of a message
returns a new state for the actor, rather than mutating the actor's
state during the handling of the message; if the system implemented
this, then any message delivery could simply be undone by returning
the message to the queue, deleting whatever outgoing messages the
execution produced, and keeping the old actor state instead of using
the new one.  So the system could simply try each pending message, one
after another, until it finds one that reduces the number of in-flight
messages.

Third, we could page out actors to make more room for the message
queue.

Of these three, the first strategy is apparently mandatory; the other
two might be useful optimizations.

2kiB of RAM is enough to hold 1024 16-bit quantities; if a typical
message contains four of these (destination actor, message name, and
two arguments) then we could handle a queue of 256 messages at once.
If half the RAM is dedicated to actor storage, we could handle 128.
This is the level of concurrency at which the system would be most
efficient; having fewer concurrently in-flight messages would worsen
the choices of which actors to page in next, and possibly reduce the
amount of work a particular actor could do before getting paged back
out, while having more would not improve that choice, but would
require time to be spent paging messages in and out.

When considering the size of each actor on its way to or from memory,
it's important to remember that we have to include its code as well as
its data.  The data might be only 2-10 words, but the code will
probably be much larger.  So it's probably worthwhile to take this
into account in decisions of which actors to page in and out, and to
share the code between objects when possible, just as in a traditional
in-memory object system without concurrency.

There are several drawbacks to this scheme:

- the space usage of the message queue is inherently nondeterministic
  --- it depends deeply on the task switcher's choice of the order to
  run tasks in.
- the cost to "page" actors in and out may be excessive, especially
  since most microcontrollers don't have any support for DMA for
  access to external serial memories.  The actors will have to be
  contain very much less code than the objects we are familiar with
  from current OO systems.

Concurrent tree-space transformation in a microcontroller
---------------------------------------------------------

Suppose instead that we run Aardappel in the microcontroller.  In
place of in-flight messages, we have the trees of the tree space,
which of course we page out to memory; in place of stateful actors, we
have stateless rewrite rules, which rewrite one or more trees into
zero or more trees.  (Approximately.)  In the Aardappel
implementation, all the rewrite rules for a particular "type" of tree
get collected by the compiler and compiled into a single function,
where the "type" is the atom at the beginning of the expression for
the tree.

So for a relatively simple system, we repeat the following process:

- figure out which type of tree is most abundant in the tree space;
- "page" in all the code needed for rewriting that type of tree
  (unless it's already paged in);
- rewrite all the trees of that type, paging them in as necessary,
  except for those that aren't currently rewritable (because some
  other tree is needed).

(This needs some refinement in case all the trees of the most common
type aren't currently rewritable.)

I'm not sure this is really very different from the other proposal,
but I think it is likely to work better for the following reasons:

- the code to rewrite a type of tree in Aardappel is likely to be
  substantially smaller than the code for a class in a Smalltalk-like
  language;
- all the state is in a single kind of thing, rather than being spread
  between messages and actor states;
- it seems straightforward in the source language to separate out
  rewrite paths that increase the number of trees from those that
  leave them constant or decrease them.
