Consider a transmission line shunted at some point with a diode and an
ac pulse (a wave packet, say) propagating along it.  When the pulse
reaches the diode, if the diode is forward-biased, the wave packet
will see a short and will reflect back, inverted.  On the other hand,
if the diode is reverse-biased, the wave packet will see an open
circuit (with perhaps some extra capacitance, which can be mostly
compensated for by reducing the distributed impedance of the
transmission line or by adding inductance) and will pass through
unimpeded.

Perhaps by this means you can compute the bitwise OR of two bitstreams
stored in a transmission line with a diode, by looking at the signal
past the diode; and perhaps you can calculated their bitwise AND by
isolating the reflected signal.

Off-the-shelf PIN diodes like the US$2.73 (US$1.27 in quantity)
M/A-Com MADP-011027-14150T operate at up to 12GHz.  So you could
imagine doing this operation on bits that were 13mm long traveling
through a transmission line at 0.5c.

With an ordinary diode, unfortunately, this provides no way to amplify
the signal.

Specialty parts like Gunn diodes (available as USSR new-old-stock on
eBay for US$8–20) can operate at higher frequencies, up to some 40GHz
in some cases (supposedly up to 200GHz in some devices I haven’t seen
for sale), and additionally have a negative differential resistance
region which can serve to amplify signals.  Supposedly, gallium
nitride Gunn diodes can reach 3 THz.  (Tunnel diodes, which are also
specialty parts, are also a possible option, although they do not
reach such high frequencies; they are available on eBay at much lower
costs, like US$1.)

These frequencies are far, far higher than any transistor.

Suppose that you found a way to do universal computation with some
kind of network of transmission lines and 3 THz Gunn diodes.  You
could very reasonably use 100 meters of coaxial transmission lines in
a desktop-sized device.  At 3 THz and a transmission speed of 0.5c,
the transmission lines would contain about 200 million oscillations at
any given time, each about 50 microns long.  You could imagine this
waveform containing 400 million bits.  With a reasonable number of
bitwise computing elements, such as 32, the device would perform 96
trillion bit operations per second.  A Skylake CPU with three 256-bit
arithmetic units might perform 1536 useful bit operations per cycle
(if we count an add with carry as two bit operations), which would be
6.144 trillion bit operations per second at 4GHz.  So such a device
could be computationally useful even without integrated circuits.
