I was thinking about event loops and transactional memory, and it
occurred to me that applying transactional memory to event loops might
solve their problems.  In some sense this is just plain “use
transactional memory” but it’s a particular choice of where to draw
the transaction boundaries: each event that would normally invoke an
event handler in an event-loop system (network data, mouse click, I/O
completion, timeout, or whatever) invokes it inside a transaction.

Event loops
-----------

One of the major concurrency models in modern software (and actually
historical software going back many decades) is the event loop.  A
CICS pseudo-conversational transaction was initiated when a message
came in from a terminal, and ran on the CPU until it yielded it;
KeyKOS server domains synchronously awaited incoming invocations, then
did some processing, usually sent a response, and returned to
awaiting; Oberon’s “central loop” keeps the processor engaged
“continuously polling event sources”; Win16 and Win32 WndProcs are
invoked once for each event on the window, handling it as they see
fit, but always on the same thread; Node.js servers and browser JS and
Tcl/Tk all use event loops, where a single-threaded process chews
through a queue of events by invoking previously registered callbacks.

The event-loop model is efficient (no need to allocate memory to
per-thread stacks), easy to understand, and relatively free from race
conditions, since each event handler must run to completion before the
next event handler can begin to run.  In effect, the event handler has
a lock on the entire memory space.  In a system with a single event
loop, as with other systems with a single lock, there’s no danger of
deadlock, because there’s only one lock.  In theory, multiple
communicating event loops can suffer from deadlock, but this seems
much less frequent in practice than system composed from threads and
locks.

(CICS also supports a “conversational” model in which a task can
suspend until it receives input, but that’s not what I’m discussing
here; after 51 years systems can get a bit muddled.)

Event-loop problems: parallelism and responsiveness
---------------------------------------------------

However, event-loop systems do have two major weaknesses: parallelism
(in the modern sense of taking advantage of multiple processors) and
responsiveness.  Almost any event-loop system can take arbitrarily
long to respond to any event, because a slow handler for a
lower-priority event can prevent the system from even noticing a
higher-priority event in time.  This is especially a problem since
event loops are only used in more-or-less real-time situations — if
only computing a correct result matters, but not how long it takes,
you can wait for all the input data to become available before you
start the computation, and then you don’t need an event loop or any
other kind of concurrency.  Typical solutions to this problem include
interrupts (re-introducing a pervasive risk of race conditions),
watchdog timers that reset the entire system when a deadline is
missed, and running separate event loops, especially for tasks of
different priorities (creating the difficulty of communicating between
them).  The BeOS GUI famously had a much more responsive UI than other
contemporary GUIs because of pervasive multithreading, i.e., running a
lot of separate event loops.

A less-common solution to the responsiveness problem used in MOO and
browser JS is to kill event handlers that hit a timeout.  To prevent
this from producing overall system instability, the timeout is only
checked at “safe points”, where all the invariants of some “system
layer” have been re-established, and only mere user code is vulnerable
to having its state corrupted.  This works far better than you would
expect, in part because that user code already has to be
exception-safe, and a thrown exception has results similar to a
handler being killed due to a timeout.  However, it pretty much
eliminates the simplicity advantage of event-loop programming over
using threads and locks.

The least-common solution is to ensure that every handler in your
event loop has bounded and acceptable worst-case execution time (WCET)
that permits an acceptably fast response to the most demanding event.
This solution does have the benefit of working, but it makes
programming for the system extremely demanding.

Optimistically-synchronized transactional memory as a possible solution
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

As an alternative, what if we adopt the solution used by CICS back in
the 1970s, and used by most web servers today?  Let’s run each event
handler (“transaction” or “task” to CICS) in its own little universe,
unable to access any shared state directly — it can only access shared
state mediated by an ACID, or at least ACI, _transaction_ (“unit of
work” to CICS).  The transaction logs all the data it reads and
buffers all the data it writes, and ensures that its execution is
_serializable_, in the sense that the end result of running some set
of event handlers is the same as running them all one at a time in
some order.  This gives you the same freedom from race conditions as
the simple event loop model, more or less by definition.

There are lots of different ways to achieve serializability, though.
One way is of course to *actually* run all transactions in some order,
or at least all transactions that write to shared data; you can do
this by just running a single thread with one transaction at a time,
with the problems described earlier, but if you have a lot of
read-only transactions, you may be able to get some performance
benefit with just a reader–writer lock, or, as SQLite3 does, a
reader–writer–pending lock.

This is called “pessimistic synchronization” because it’s working to
prevent problems, rather than fix them.  More sophisticated
pessimistic-synchronization strategies with more locks that permit
higher levels of concurrency are possible, but they all have the
property that if any state is shared between high-priority code and
low-priority code, it’s possible for the high-priority code to have to
wait on the execution of the low-priority code.  If the problem is
merely scheduler priorities, you can solve this with priority
inheritance, but if the problem is that the low-priority code just has
too much work to do before it finishes, you don’t want pessimistic
synchronization, which is to say, you don’t want locks, because you’re
back to the event-loop situation where any piece of code in your
system can potentially make the response to any event too slow.

(There’s also the risk of deadlock once you have multiple locks,
although there are strategies that avoid this — acquiring all locks at
transaction start in a deterministic order, for example.  This breaks
procedural compositionality, though, because you need to know all the
possible locks any transitively invoked subroutine might need when you
start the transaction.)

Pessimistically-synchronized transactions typically provide the
ability for the user code to roll back the transaction at any time,
for example in response to a violation of data integrity constraints.
This prevents any of the transaction’s writes from being saved; it’s
as if the transaction never happened, except for the error message
returned.  But, in general, this (or deadlock) is the only reason a
pessimistic transaction can fail; other concurrent transactions have
no influence on whether they fail or succeed, and they can be written
to always succeed.

As Joe Duffy notes in his 2010 retrospective blog post about [the
canceled planned software-transactional-memory support in the .NET
CIL][0], as long as everything you care about is in the transactional
store, this also gives you a great way to recover from exceptions: any
exception inside the transaction rolls back the transaction.  However,
you may need some kind of special debug interface to read the debug
printfs from the aborted transaction — because, as noted above, you
don’t want arbitrary I/O from inside the transaction to be possible.

[0]: http://joeduffyblog.com/2010/01/03/a-brief-retrospective-on-transactional-memory/

Optimistic synchronization, by contrast, can guarantee forward
progress and worst-case execution times, but they can always fail.
Optimistic synchronization works as follows: if, when a transaction is
ready to commit, any of the data it read has been changed by another
transaction, the transaction is rolled back and retried from the
beginning, using the same code but the new data.  This can be done at
the microscopic level using multi-word compare-and-swap primitives, or
you can do it at the system level with unbounded optimistic
transactions.

Because optimistic synchronization detects conflicts after they’ve
happened, instead of preventing them, any transaction may be aborted
at any time for reasons outside of its control.  This means that it is
unsafe for it to do any I/O before it commits or, more generally,
affect anything outside of the transaction-controlled universe — if it
has to be rolled back and retried twice, you don’t want it to send
three emails or delete the same file three times (failing on the
second and third attempts).  (This property is why Microsoft canceled
the .NET STM mentioned earlier.)

This gives us precisely what we need to fix event loops: you can
guarantee the response time to a high-priority event simply by pausing
all lower-priority transactions when they try to commit, so they can’t
write to the shared store, and then the high-priority event is
guaranteed to complete in only the time it needs to execute its own
code and do the required accesses to the shared store.  If this
conflicts with any ongoing lower-priority transactions, that will be
discovered once those transactions are resumed; they will be rolled
back and tried again.  Also, as long as you don’t have interference
and consequent rollbacks, you can get the full benefit of however many
CPUs you’re running on — unlike a CICS region, which uses cooperative
multitasking between event handlers, all on a single thread.

Mutability
----------

Transactional memory is not a great fit with pervasive mutability of
shared data; most of the intractable problems Duffy mentions in the
CIL implementation stem from pervasive mutability.  Immutable
(“persistent”) data structures can be read safely, inside or outside
transactions, without any chance that another thread is modifying them
and thus with no need to log the reads and revalidate them later.

However, this really only works if you have a garbage collector, which
is going to make it hard to guarantee responsiveness.  Without a GC,
whoever deallocates the data structure is “mutating” it.  To some
extent you might be able to keep the GC from interfering with
high-priority tasks by ensuring that those tasks always have enough
memory to run without invoking the GC, but it’s also important to
ensure that the GC doesn’t hold any locks that the high-priority task
might need to wait on, or if so that it releases them promptly.

To the extent that the GC only has to run over shared data that
persists across transactions, though, the GC load may be light enough
to never be a problem.

Composable Memory Transactions
------------------------------

There’s a lovely paper called “Composable Memory Transactions”
describing the Haskell STM with its “fail” and “orElse” constructs;
these provide a way to use transactional memory to wait for arbitrary
predicates to become true, and also to compose such single-event waits
into multiple-event waits or nonblocking polls, and similarly to
convert nonblocking polls into blocking polls.

The approach is very simple.  First, for blocking, you have a “fail”
construct which fails your transaction as if from interference from
another transaction, prompting the transaction system to retry it.
But it would be futile, though correct, to try it again immediately,
since it will fail in the same way.  So at least one of the things it
read inside the transaction before failing needs to have changed
before it will be able to succeed.

Waiting for a conjunction of such conditions is simple: you invoke
each of the wait procedures, one after the other, inside of a
transaction.  Since the transaction is isolated, you are guaranteed
that nothing changes from the beginning to the end of the sequence, so
you know that all of the wait-predicates are simultaneously allowing
execution to continue.

Waiting on a disjunction requires a new `orElse` construct, which
recovers from the failure of a nested transaction by trying an
alternative nested transaction.  In effect, it composes two
transactions into a single ordered-choice or disjunction transaction.
For example, if the first transaction was an attempt to read from some
queue X, while the second is an attempt to read from some queue Y,
each failing when its respective queue is empty, then the combination
will fail precisely when both queues are empty.  Alternatively, the
second transaction could simply be some computation to carry out in
the case where queue X is empty, thus transforming blocking into
nonblocking polling.

I don’t know why I started writing this section.