Suppose you set up a high-Q acoustic resonator strongly coupled to the
air at, say, 102kHz, with its output connected to some kind of
acoustic rectifier.  If your Q was 20, you could tune in to about a
5100-Hz-wide band.  This would be enough to receive and demodulate an
ultrasonic AM signal with "telephone quality", i.e. low-pass filtered
to about 4kHz.

It's feasible to focus a 102kHz ultrasonic signal in air to a spot
about 0.3 centimeter across, or to transmit a low-loss collimated
ultrasonic beam of such a frequency that's only a few centimeters
across.  This could allow substantial-distance ultrasonic AM
communication through air despite the way that air attenuates high
frequencies (about [1.5 dB/ft at 100kHz][0], and increasing linearly
with frequency from 0.5 dB/ft at 50kHz up to 5 dB/ft at 250kHz).  For
example, if you started with a ten-square-meter dish or phased-array
transmitter transmitting at 120dBa (1 W/m², 10 W total) and focused it
on a square-centimeter receiver, you'd get an antenna gain of 50dB.
If 40dB was an acceptable listening volume, and your "rectifier" was
able to recover -10dB of the original signal, you'd need 50dB at the
receiver, which means you could afford 120dB of attenuation along the
signal path: 80 feet.

At this distance, your Airy disk radius angle (1.2λ/d) is about 
1.2 * 0.003 m / √10 m = 0.001, which at 80 feet gives you an actual
radius of 3cm, or 6cm diameter.  So you're diffraction-limited by your
transmitting antenna rather than scale-limited by the wavelength of
the signal.  This limits your actual antenna gain to 40dB instead of
the 50dB in the previous paragraph, so you'd only be able to actually
transmit about 75 feet.

If you could get by with a narrower-band signal, you could use a lower
frequency.  At 51kHz, where you could transmit three times as far with
the same path attenuation (at the cost of less antenna gain, since
your Airy disk diameter doubles with the longer waves and triples with
the greater distance to 18cm, making it 36 times greater in area,
bringing the maximum antenna gain down to about 25dB), your Q=20
receiver could handle a 2.6kHz band.  If you were only transmitting
speech, you could probably get by with that with a simple hack:
frequencies over 2kHz in speech are almost always part of a burst of
white noise, such as a sibilant.  If you hook up a high-pass filter to
the decoded signal and run its output to something nonlinear, you
should be able to generate strong harmonics up to a few kHz, which
would imperfectly approximate the high-frequency component of the
original signal.  (I think this is the reason that audio clipping in
walkie-talkies improves comprehensibility.)

Being able to transmit comprehensible speech, to a passive receiver
with no moving or electronic parts, anywhere in a 225-foot radius
(comparable to Wi-Fi) sounds pretty cool, even if not a real
improvement over just hollering.  The receiver needing to be 36cm
across would seem to somewhat blunt that, though, although you could
get a proportionally smaller receiver by making a proportionally
larger transmitter.

With this level of spatial demultiplexing, however, you might not need
frequency division multiplexing at all.  Even at 26kHz, which ought to
give you a greater transmission distance (450 feet?), your 10m²
transmitter can focus down to a 1.5-meter-diameter spot.  A larger
transmitter could both transmit more energy and focus it on a smaller
spot.

What if instead of transmitting the signal through free air, you
transmitted it down a string, like a higher-tech version of paper cups
connected with string?

[0]: http://www.sensorsmag.com/sensors/acoustic-ultrasound/choosing-ultrasonic-sensor-proximity-or-distance-measurement-825