Suppose you have built an [undersea or other underwater habitat][0], like
Jacques Cousteau, Tom Swift, or many popular science articles from the
1950s; but it's autonomous rather than having an umbilical to a
surface support station.  How do you get energy to run and repair your
base?

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Underwater_habitat

The usual suspects: fission power, solar, fuel, buoys; and their drawbacks
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fission power is clearly the best option, but suppose you can't use
fission power for political reasons.

If you have sunlight, you can of course use solar panels, although the
water will absorb some of it.  (See file `underground-arcology` for
notes on the absorption spectra of different kinds of water.)  If
you're under enough water to make it difficult to see you from the
surface, or from space, you will get only a tiny amount of sunlight
energy.

You can periodically receive shipments of fuel, but burning fuel
requires an oxidizer such as oxygen, so you need shipments of oxidizer
too.  As described in file `the-suburbean`, the best option to me
seems to be sodium chlorate, but even so, you end up with only 5 MJ/kg
when you include the weight of the sodium chlorate rather than the
usual 43 MJ/kg we're used to on land.

By floating a buoy on the surface, it's possible to gather surface
solar energy, and also some amount of wave power, as well as sucking
in air for human respiration and perhaps fuel combustion.  But the
buoy is visible, which may be undesirable, and also exposed to damage
from heavy seas, ship collisions, oxygen, and sunlight.

Underwater "kite" wind power
----------------------------

I think the best option in many places is analogous to kite wind
power, using a reconfigurable-geometry buoy floated some distance
below the surface but above the bed; when configured for high-drag
geometry, it pulls on its tether, which is gradually let out,
generating power; when the tether is nearly exhausted or it's too
close to the surface, it's reconfigured for a lower-drag geometry and
reeled back in at a much lower energy cost than what it generated when
it was being let out.  This is much easier than the equivalent task in
the air because the velocities are lower, the forces are much higher,
the rope length and therefore snapback potential energy is lower, and
it's easy to reconfigure the "kite's" buoyancy for a particular
altitude under the water.

(I think passive altitude control via buoyancy control is much more
difficult in water than in air; the density of air varies sufficiently
with pressure for a balloon to hover within tens of centimeters of a
constant height as the rubber holds its own volume relatively
constant; on the other hand, in a submarine, water density varies only
very slightly with pressure, but higher pressure will tend to collapse
your swim bladder and reduce your buoyancy further.)

Cables under tension can carry an amazing amount of power.  Consider
gel-spun UHMWPE, with its 2.4 GPa yield stress (see file `dyneema`).
At 10 m/s, a snappy but not insane speed (22 miles per hour, in
medieval units), 2.4 GPa is 24 GW/m², which is 24 kW/mm².  According
to file `induction-kiln`, AWG20 [copper] wire can safely carry 5 amps
and is 0.812 mm in diameter (not counting the insulation), or 9.7
megawatts/volt/m²; so, reaching the same 24 GW/m² with it requires
2500 volts.  At 100 m/s, the UHMWPE cable carries 240 GW/m² = 240
kW/mm², which requires 25 kV in the electrical wire.  Copper weighs 9
g/cc, about 9× what UHMWPE weighs.

Lower cable speeds require proportionally more tension and thus more
cable thickness to deliver the same power.

Regular air kites
-----------------

A regular air kite might be better in some sense, particularly at
those underwater sites, such as those at the bottom of medium-sized
lakes, that have no significant water currents.  It could be made of a
hydrophobic material, floated to the surface of the water by slight
inflation, and then floated to kite height by further inflation with
hydrogen or helium.  Once in the air it can expand substantially to a
size much larger than the underwater structure.

In file `the-suburbean`, it is proposed to store some 500 MJ of energy
in half a tonne of Li-ion batteries to provide a month's worth of
180-watt autonomy without access to air, in a habitat equipped with,
among other things, 25 kW of winches.  Suppose that the kite pulls 100
kilonewtons, which is a bit over ten tonnes (42 mm² of UHMWPE, or
maybe 100 mm² = 1 cm² to have a safety factor), and rises to a height
of only 200 m in order to avoid interfering with aircraft; and suppose
that the wind at that height is generally 20 m/s.  That provides a
megawatt or two of power, enough to fully charge the batteries in five
to twenty minutes, although it requires some kind of apparatus in the
lake habitat capable of storing megawatts of power.

So, like a ball python, this underwater habitat could lurk unobserved
at the bottom of a still, dark lake, reaching out to replenish its
energy from its environment once or twice a month; but instead of
swallowing a rat, it silently flies a kite for a few minutes in the
middle of the night.

Hovering submarine assemblages
------------------------------

As I described previously in "hovering kite assemblages" (?) a flying
machine large enough to simultaneously be at altitudes with winds in
different directions can use those differing wind directions to
maintain tautness in the tethers between its various otherwise
disconnected parts, to control its direction of movement, and to
generate energy to power it, in particular keeping it from falling out
of the sky.  Similarly, a group of tethered submarines at different
depths could harness the differing directions of deep-sea currents at
those depths to generate energy and control their direction of
movement.  (Lift in that case is unnecessary.)

In a sense, that's what a sailboat is doing: harnessing energy from
the relative movement between the air and water to move in any
direction, including tacking upwind.

Lift/drag calculations
----------------------

The hydrodynamic force of a fluid flowing past a body can act on it in
almost any direction; in general it is proportional to the density of
the fluid, the square of the impact velocity, and the cross-sectional
area of the body perpendicular to the direction of the flow, and has
an additional factor which I think is actually the "drag coefficient".
Conventionally it's resolved into a scalar in the direction of the
fluid flow called "drag" and a two-dimensional vector perpendicular to
it called "lift".

In a constant flow in the absence of any other applied force, drag
gradually accelerates the body to the velocity of the flow, causing
the hydrodynamic force to disappear.  This leads to an interesting
phenomenon where the power produced at zero velocity and maximum force
is zero, and the power produced at zero force and maximum velocity is
also zero; maximum power is somewhere in between, specifically at one
third of maximum velocity.  (Unless the drag coefficient changes,
which it does.)

Because drag is complicated --- the coefficients vary with flow speed
and viscosity, and not even continuously or monotonically --- I
hesitate to pronounce anything too pompous about this, but *very
roughly* this suggests that water currents tend to produce about a
thousand times as much force and power as wind of the same speed; for
wind to provide the same force, it needs to go 32 times as fast, but
to provide the same power, it only needs to go 10 times as fast.  Or,
changing a different variable, wind needs a thousand times as much
area to press on to be equivalent to a water current of the same
speed.

