I was reading Raphael Finkel’s book “Advanced Programming Language
Design”, and he mentions a language somebody named Finkel invented in
the 1970s called AL.  AL had dimensional analysis built in, with four
base dimensions: ‘time’, ‘distance’, ‘angle’, and ‘mass’.

(As Finkel says, this is the kind of “type safety” that’s really
needed in everyday calculations.  His language did it statically, but
you can do it dynamically too, as units(1) does.)

He points out that ‘angle’ really shouldn’t be included since radians
are really dimensionless, which leaves us with ‘time’, ‘distance’, and
‘mass’.  But no ‘speed’, ‘force’ or ‘energy’.

However, they can be derived from the base units; speed is a ratio
distance/time — e.g., m/s.  Acceleration is speed/time, or m/s², and
force can be thought of as mass \* acceleration, or kg\*m/s².  Finally,
energy is force \* distance, so you can express it in units of
kg\*m²/s².  This is in fact how units(1) represents it.

But do we really need all three of ‘time’, ‘distance’, and ‘mass’?
The speed of light provides a natural conversion factor between time
and distance, and mass can be equivalently measured as energy,
according to the well-known formula E = mc².  So speed is really just
a dimensionless quantity, and acceleration is the reciprocal of a time
interval, namely the time to reach the speed of light at that constant
acceleration; so its units are really 1/s.  So force can really be
measured merely with kg/s.

Unfortunately this doesn’t really help us get rid of mass: energy is
now expressed in kg\*s/s, or merely kg.  So our two relativity-based
equivalences (mass as energy, and time as distance) turned out to be
merely two facets of the same equivalence.

But I suspect that in everyday calculations, the equivalence of mass
and energy is rarely useful; it’s far more likely to hide errors than
to reduce the amount of work necessary.  With time, distance, and
mass, the only incommensurable quantities I commonly run into with
commensurable units are:

- torque and energy;
- various dimensionless quantities;
- perhaps pressure and stress;
- stress and young’s modulus.

Collapsing mass with energy and time with distance creates many more
“units collisions”.
