Playing with Carolina's idea of an expanded theremin.

There are two major questions: inputs and outputs.

Inputs
------

Minority-Report-style lights on hands in front of a webcam?

Kinect body scanning in real time?

Arduinos with accelerometers?

Power-glove-style strain gauges?

Theremins use capacitive sensing.  This is clearly a possibility, but
it is harder with high-speed electronics around, since the capacitance
signals you're looking for are very small.  An actual theremin circuit
might be the best way to measure proximity.

Ultrasound signaling is another traditional approach for VR equipment.

Outputs
-------

Some of this is tricky because the input channels we're considering
are possibly pretty high latency: webcam plus image processing
algorithms, say.  So it might make some sense for the musician to
control the tempo and type of rhythm rather than the exact timing.

(Some prototyping will reveal how big a problem this is in practice.
You could imagine that a QVGA 320x240 image wouldn't really take that
long to process, and might be adequate.)

The possibility of the music coming out is, fortunately or
unfortunately, many-dimensional.  Even a single note can be loud or
soft, high or low, bent up or down, of many different timbres, and of
many different envelopes, and at any time.  An entire melody has many
notes, and the relationships they bear to one another are potentially
very complicated.

So one crucial question is how many low-latency high-bandwidth
dimensions of input we can achieve: two with each hand?  Another with
angle?  Another with finger separation?  Other joint orientations?

One possible mapping is with radius for volume or timbre, and angle
for pitch.  Going around the circle more than once would go up or down
a whole octave.

Another possibility is moving virtual objects around a space, maybe a
time-frequency representation where time is streaming past you.

Another kind of exploration would adjust parameters of different state
machines with your movements: a melody generator, a rhythm generator,
a timbre generator or two.  Maybe, at its simplest, you could have one
direction to move in to seek change, and another direction to move in
to stay the same; or you could have a sort of pie menu thing where
you're always selecting one of the parameters to vary, and your
distance from the center controls how fast it varies.  It's crucial
for the feedback here to be within a few hundred milliseconds in order
for the interface to be discoverable.
