Old computer display systems used a “character generator” to drive the
raster display (see file `gradient-pixels` for more detail), giving
rise to the traditional “terminal screen” look and feel, with its
single shitty typewriter font, blaring primary colors, block cursors,
and readability-slaughtering background-color transitions on
character-cell boundaries.  The major advantage of this system is that
it saves a lot of memory; in `gradient-pixels`, I gave the example of
a color 80×25 terminal with 8×16 pixels per character, which requires
somewhere between 2000 bytes and 8096 bytes for a 1-bit-deep font, and
perhaps 20 kilobytes or so for a font with antialiasing or color.  But
a framebuffer for the 256000 pixels would require probably 128–768
kilobytes.

An interesting alternative that occurred to me today is to drive the
pixel generator from a complete set of Wang tiles.  The pixel
generator still uses a rectangular array of data directly
corresponding to physical screen positions, but the “font” is
potentially larger, because the pixels on the screen are a function
not only of the glyph index at the underlying location, but also of
some pixel generator state.  Specifically, you have, say, two bits of
“bottom-edge-color state” from the corresponding cell in the previous
line (that is, the cell above this one), and, say, two bits of
“left-edge-color state” from the corresponding cell in the previous
column (that is, the cell to the left).  And the font entry indexed by
these four bits and the bits of the glyph index contains not only
pixels but also the new bottom-edge-color state and left-edge-color
state.

In the simplest case, where the rectangular array has no bits per
character position, the screen contents are entirely determined by the
font; at each position, the four bits of edge state uniquely determine
the pixels to display at that position, from the 16 available glyphs
in the font, and also determine the new edge state.  With a single bit
of color per edge, and thus only 4 glyphs, this is sufficient in
itself to generate some simple fractals and count in binary, but
nothing more interesting, but with two bits of edge state, all kinds
of interesting programs are possible.  (There are 16¹⁶ = 2⁶⁴ possible
programs that can be encoded in the font edge state bits.)

When the rectangular array actually has some data in it, we can think
of the bits in it as specifying which of the valid alternative tiles,
as constrained by the environment, is to occupy the space; this, in
turn, affects the environment of the cells below and to the right.

To take a slightly more interesting case, you might use 5 bits per
character position to encode which letter is to appear there, with
four variants of the space character — one to set the right-edge state
to any of four alternatives, which we could gloss as FIGURES,
TITLECASE, UPPERCASE, and LOWERCASE.  The TITLECASE glyphs might be
identical to the UPPERCASE glyphs in appearance, but the right edge of
a TITLECASE glyph leaves the left-edge state set to LOWERCASE, while
the right edge of an UPPERCASE glyph remains in UPPERCASE.  This is a
somewhat suboptimal way to handle case-shifting, since it means that
each case-shift leaves a blank space on the screen — undesirable if
you’re talking about Mohamed ElBaradei, or example — but it shows that
there are some interesting possibilities.

Accommodating descenders from previous lines, or using special
word-initial forms of letters, are other possible uses at the
character-cell level.

But what if instead we use Wang tiles at a slightly finer granularity
than per character cell?  After all, if we try to have 256 possible
tiles for any given environment, we need 4096 tiles if we have two
bits of color on each edge, which implies an uncomfortably large “font
ROM”.  What if each tile only covers *part* of a letter?  Maybe “ɑ”,
“d”, and “q” could share a common code for the common part of the
letter, while “d” and perhaps “l” could share a common ascender glyph.
Perhaps we could even have a smaller font ROM rather than a larger
one.

For circuit schematics, we could use edge colors to note whether a
wire is or is not present at each edge of a tile, eliminating some
duplication.  However, without backtracking, the potential promise for
this to propagate changes across your whole schematic without further
work is limited — they can only propagate down and to the right.