As a measure aimed at reduction of wars, we should perhaps accept
weregild again.  The traditional Scandinavian weregild rate was 200
solidi for a churl, the least noble category of person for which
weregild was due, which works out to 900 g of gold, about US$40k at
today’s gold prices.  I think the current Saudi diyya is a hundred
thousand riyals for the noblest category of victim (Muslim men), which
is a bit less than US$30k (US$26.7k as of 2015).  These prices are a
bit lower than modern wrongful-death awards in US courts, which I
think are commonly in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, sometimes
up into the millions.  Presumably the Saudi prices do not apply to
members of the royal family.

In Scandinavian times somewhat larger amounts were due for nobler
victims: 600 solidi for a duke or archbishop, 300 solidi for a
low-ranking cleric (or 400 if they were reading mass at the time), or
at another time 1200 for a nobleman, 15000 for an archbishop, or 30000
for the king.  The Mercians paid a lower weregild of 110 solidi for
Welshmen, or less if they owned no property.

For modern times, probably the prices measured in gold should be
higher, partly since we live in a society that is much wealthier, but
also because we aspire to egalitarianism; we don’t consider women to
be worth half a man, as Saudi Arabia does and Iran used to, or
Christians to be worth half a Muslim, or dukes to be worth three
commoners.  Perhaps a reasonable number would be 64 bitcoin, which is
currently about US$240k, but will fluctuate with the value of bitcoin.
Bitcoin is still very short-term unstable but will probably be a
stabler measure of value over the next century or two than the dollar
or gold.

Traditionally, wergild (and diyya, wrongful-death awards, and similar
concepts) are payable to family members of the victim.  Modern
sensibilities would demand this to be under the voluntary control of
the victim: the payment should be made to the heirs of the victim
whoever they be, whether family members or not, as surely it would
pile injustice upon injustice to, for example, award the wergild for a
transgender hate crime victim to their disowned transphobic parents.

