XCHG: An Archival Swap Machine
==============================

Move machines suffer one big problem as a replacement for Brainfuck:
the register operands are necessarily in pairs, which halves code
density in some sense and means that reading the code can easily
suffer from framing errors. $&@ might mean write to $ and then
transfer & to @, or transfer $ to & and then read from @, depending on
where we are.

As a fix to this, I suggest a variant move machine with 26 directly
nameable registers, one for each English letter, and two instructions
for each one: a capital letter to read it into the accumulator, or
perhaps subtract it, and a lowercase letter to write the accumulator
to it. So Ab would copy A to B, and Abc would copy A to both B and C.

A further convenience for compiled code would be to define the digits
such as 4 as "multiply accumulator by 10 and add 4". This allows
constants to be provided in a reasonable way.

Subleq is a universal OISC. So we can get all arithmetic from just
subtraction; a single subtracting accumulator is thus a sufficient
interface for all arithmetic. You could memory-map it with a single
location, which gives the current total when read or subtracts when
written.

Subleq, however, also includes a signed comparison and conditional
jump. And to program anything more than state machines on it, you need
self-modifying code, unless you make its output and one of its inputs
indirectly addressed.

To get around the state machine limitation, you can memory-map a
pointer register and its pointee, like the PIC. And getting a jump
requires memory-mapping the program counter. The combination almost
gives you a conditional jump; all that's left is a way to get a
Boolean to index with, like a < instruction that fills the accumulator
with its sign bit. That way you can index to either the program
counter or the word after it.

This memory-mapping the PC thing means that your memory cells need to
be more than a byte, so figure 32 bits.

One final thing needed to make the machine reasonable: a subroutine
return mechanism. Let's say that when writing to the program counter
directly (not as a pointee) we swap the would-be new program counter
value with the accumulator. Then the callee can save it upon entry for
return later.

Could that work as a general mechanism? It would eliminate the
read-write distinction, but you would need a memory-mapped
copy/discard device in addition to the subtractor, the pointer, the
pointee, and the program counter. But you would get 80-some printable
registers instead of 26. As a special bonus, you could claim the
machine was "linear" or "reversible".

You also need input and output devices. The traditional Brainfuck .,
interface seems adequate, but should use the accumulator contents, and
can reliably report end of file.

I recommend writing code for this machine on fixed-width lines of 100
characters in order to make subroutine calls work reasonably.

This seems like a machine that should be nearly as easy to implement
on most machines as Brainfuck, but much easier to generate code
for. Let's take the always-swap option:

; always reads as the last value written to :, discarding written data  
, discards written data and reads as the next byte of input  
. writes output and reads zero  
0123456789 multiply accumulator by ten and add a digit  
- reads the subtracted total and also subtracts the current accumulator from it  
' is a register pointing to memory  
" is an alias for the place ' points to  
< sets the accumulator to -1 if it is negative, 0 otherwise  
^ is the program counter  

9 instructions and memory-mapped locations, not much worse than
Brainfuck's 8 instructions. Alternatively, without the cutesy swap
thing, except for jumps:

Aa read and write bytes of input and output  
0123456789 multiply by ten and add a digit  
B reads the subtracted total  
b subtracts the accumulator from it  
C reads the value at the address written to D (maybe use B instead?)  
c writes the value at the address written to D  
Dd read and write a register that is normal except for controlling C  
E reads the address of the next instruction  
e sets the address of the next instruction, causing a jump, and also
sets the accumulator to what the next instruction would have been  
< fills the accumulator with its sign bit  
Other letters read and write general-purpose registers.

This is 7 to 10 instructions depending on how you analyze it. It seems
to me that these two formulations are close to the same complexity to
implement, but the first one is much more novel, and either might turn
out to be easier to program with — by which I mostly mean write
compiler backends targeting it. You have the capacity to do
subroutines/functions, multiple threads, dynamic dispatch, array
indexing, and so on.

x = y + z is, with the swap machine, y-z--:;-;--x, I think, starting
with a zero subtractor. We subtract y and z from zero to get the
negated sum.  We store that in : to use it twice to make it positive,
then read the sum and store it in x.

Zeroing the subtractor is a challenge, because zeroing is
irreversible. We need to subtract not only the subtractor's original
contents, but also the accumulator contents that we folded into it in
the process. After the sequence --, the subtractor has had its
previous contents canceled, but it still has the negated original
accumulator contents in it. :;--; saves these original accumulator
contents in :, then wipes out previous : contents with ;. After --; we
have wiped out the old - contents too, leaving the original
accumulator contents negated in - and unnegated in : and the
accumulator. Another - gives us the negated original in - and twice
the negated original in -; now if we save the negated original in :,
we can subtract it twice: :;-;- or in full :;--;-:;-;-. There may be a
simpler way to zero the subtractor, but I think that way works.

